

======================================================================
FILE: How to QC Manufacturers - Evolve Supply Chain Program Evolve.txt
======================================================================

How to QC Manufacturers - Evolve Supply Chain Program Evolve
All right, welcome. Um, yeah, so we're going to do a module on how to perform quality control
with manufacturers. And really just, like, take people kind of through the process of, like, you
know, things that things that you need to know, whether you have people on the ground, or
you're.
Doing this yourself and operating remotely, there's various different QC systems that you could
have in place. Uh, so we'll dive into it right now and, you know, just show you also what the
challenges are with it and. And, uh, we'll go from there.
So. CJ, I'll let you kick it off with, uh, why quality control matters. Yeah, so quality control matters
because it doesn't matter.
How good of a product you've developed, or how well you're selling it. Um, you know, if you, if
you ignore quality control from the beginning, you're. Acceptable to widespread defects.
Oftentimes it's not discovered until after shipments arrive, or they're in customers hands and
you're starting to get feedback. Um, so in this module, we're going to go over things you can do
and steps you can take to make sure that the proper quality measures are in place before you
start production. How you should go about testing before you get into production, um, and just
really how to navigate the quality control aspect of working with manufacturers.
Um, yeah, Chris, like, you're, um, just from your experience, like, um. You know, what, what, what
kind of, uh, like. Systems or anything in general, um, you know, did you want to have, uh.
In place that you feel is just, like, very, uh, like, beneficial because, like, a lot of times you were
also, like, operating remotely. Yeah, look, I think that there's a couple of different things that I
would mention as we're talking about quality control. Quality control is a process that doesn't just
happen at 1 point in production quality control is something that takes place over the entire
supply chain.
And so it's important to have processes in place, not just domestically on the US side, or at the
factory, the manufacturer, uh, abroad, but it's important that each step along that way. You have
these different checkpoints, these key C checkpoints to make sure that you're truly
understanding, uh, where if there are quality issues, they're actually occurring. So, you might be
manufacturing your product in Shenzhen, but there, and you have the assembly taking place at
this factory.
Uh, for your gadget product, let's say, but some of the componentry, you might have a supplier
for a speaker. You might have a supplier for the battery. You've got.
Uh, all of these different components, you might have an injection separate injection factory even.

And so all of these parts will then get brought over to the assembly factory, and there could have
been something wrong with the componentry being provided to the manufacturer. And so that
can also create issues, right? You might have a complaint to your manufacturer about the product
and then about the product that they shipped out.
But in reality, there was some problem also with the component sub componentry that they had
ordered. And so it adds a lot of complexity then to managing, uh, issues when they arise, if you
don't have the appropriate processes in place up front. And so what I recommend is for all key
componentry, you have some sort of, uh, outgoing quality inspection at your sub after sub
manufacturer.
You have incoming quality control at your actual assembly factory. And then, of course, you have
in line and final inspections as well at your actual manufacturer. Right? And what that will help to
do is it's going to help to spell out where along the supply chain.
There are problems. Uh, and that's essential, right? When something goes wrong, you need to be
able to identify what that root causes and then what were the contributing factors to, um, you
know, what, what was, what were the conditions that created that issue? Yeah, so it's really
important when you're setting up the OQC and IQC with your sub vendors to the final assembly
factory that everyone's on the same page with the same specifications. And that all of your sub
vendors know what the function and assembly of that part is eventually going to be.
Um, that way there are no surprises. If anything ever pops up cool. All right, so let's talk about just
like the, the initial evaluation of a product of doing like a QC when it's a, when it's arriving in the
factory.
Yeah, so you're going to want to meet with the factory and see who they're, you know, who their
quality manager is, who manages the quality department. Oftentimes there's going to be a
production manager that's in charge of the whole line and they have a separate quality
department. Um, and that manager generally reports to the production manager who works with
the engineers and all of the sub vendors and everything.
So you want to just go and see who that person is, what type of experience they have the type of
document documentation they have. And then you want to go to the factory and see what type of
documentation that they're creating and work with him to set the specifications on exactly what
your expectations are for the product. Yeah, I would say also that, uh, it's absolutely essential that
not only do you have physical product in hand wherever you're located around the world.
Right? Not only do you have physical product that you would say is like a golden sample. So, like,
reflective of the exact product, proper function, everything that you're satisfied with. It's also
important that your manufacturer has golden samples as well in hand.
So that they have that as a constant reference to compare to benchmark themselves against.

Yeah, so once you've analyzed the factory procedures, the next step is going to be talking going
and actually looking at the production line and seeing what other processes they have in place.
For example, like, there might be certain lighting required and how far away from the light.
They're looking at the product, how far away it is from their face, identifying, like, what types of
blemishes would be considered, uh, you know, a go no go type of blemish. I think we're going to
talk a lot about go no go here and like, how to define what that actually looks like. Um, and and
how to use that process and implement it with with your factories.
Okay, um, so now, now, like, like, um, let's try to, uh, like, um, switch gears a little bit and just go
over, um, you know, just some best practices and like, well, you know, we could tailor it a little bit
more, um, you know, to to the community that's that's kind of doing stuff remotely. Um, you know,
in addition to if they have teams on the ground in China. Yeah, so if you're managing quality
control at the factory level, um, there's a bunch of different ways to do it remotely, right? All these
things that we just talked about, like, identifying the processes, these are all questions you're
going to have to ask kind of upfront when you're vetting a supplier before you go into production
with them after you've started production with them.
If you can't be on the ground yourself, you might want to consider working with a sourcing
company or a third party inspection company, or maybe even hiring, like, your own part time
quality control person that's aligned with your your goals and your expectations to go and work
with the factory for you. Yeah, I also, like, I think, you know, you bring up the point about how it
needs to be done at the factory level. Like, there's a lot of there's a lot of, like, fulfillment
companies that are doing some form of QC, um, at, you know, at the warehouse, um, you know,
before things are shipped out.
And I think we should discuss, you know, what what are kind of the problems with that? And
what's like, not true, like, what root issues are not really getting solved? When, when that level of
QC is being done, because it's, it's more than likely that I'd say that, like, things aren't being done
at the factory level. So, like, CJ, like, when you've been when you're told sometimes that, like, you
know, the fulfillment companies prior to working with us, we're, we're doing it, we're doing the QC,
you know, but they weren't really talking about, like, the factory actually doing QC, like, what
we're kind of like the, you know, problems you're solving. So, like, what are some of the issues
that you saw with, with those comments? I think I think the biggest thing is just the breakdown of
communication, right? Like, if the fulfillment company is doing the purchasing or sourcing for you,
and then they're saying that you have these, you know, quality defects that just keep popping up
batch after batch, it's like, who were they actually reporting these issues to? And then who is
responsible for getting down to the root cause of the issue? Like, if you just have like an account
manager at a fulfillment company that's telling you they have these defects, and that account
manager is just dealing with the sales sales rep, either at a trading company, that's the
middleman between them in the factory or a sales rep at the factory, but no real conversation is
being had between the person identifying the defects, and the people responsible for quality

control at the factory to really draw dial in that root cause, then you're just opening yourself up to
repeat issues.
Yeah, exactly. And if you're not understanding, like, if you don't understand the root cause, there's
also a possibility that you end up in a situation where it's kind of like a, he says, she says issue
where, for example, the factory might say, oh, when we shipped out, the product was fine. You
know, there was no cosmetic defect on the product.
Maybe you were just handling it in, you know, maybe you didn't handle the product properly when
you brought it into your warehouse. Like, there's issues like that that can occur that can have
really catastrophic consequences. Just to be like, hey, like, what's going on with like, all these
scratches, and then, you know, they come back to us and they're like, wait, what are you talking
about? Like, we, during our QC process, like, we take pictures of everything, and make sure that,
you know, there aren't defects like that.
Because if there are, it's like a very tiny percentage, if there are. So it's like, they sent us
everything. Yeah, I mean, that segues really nicely into the last point here on the page, which is
creating a clear reporting process.
So that you can, you know what I mean? If you can identify, like, when issues occur throughout
the production process, you're going to be much more effective in IDing those root causes. You'll
be much more effective in taking corrective actions. You know, so yeah, totally, totally on the
same page.
Greg, what's funny about that example that you actually just brought up, we caught that fulfillment
company in a hard place in the end, they shipped all of the units back to the factory. They said
they checked 100% of them, and they were all defective. The factory received them, did a
secondary QC, where they provided photos and videos and everything again.
We found out that most of the units were untouched, had no scratches, we sent the same batch
back again, and it got checked in and received with no issues after a full inspection again. And so
it's like, there's a lot of different games that people play and a lot of politics to be able to navigate
this stuff. And that's why it's really important to be able to have direct communication with the
person who's responsible for production at the factory.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Yeah, no, that's good.
That's good. Okay, great. Yeah, no, I think we definitely got a good sense on that.
So let's go over our quality control process and just kind of like, how people could like also apply
the same process for themselves and stuff like that. Yeah, number one here is manufacturing risk
analysis and acceptance criteria. What is the factory's QC process? So, you know, what this
refers to, it's like absolutely essential as you're getting started with a manufacturer to identify what

their procedures are that they have in place.
Like, do they have an adequate process in place to identify issues when they occur? Do they
have testing equipment on hand to be able to verify, you know, verify theories about the product?
Do they have the appropriate personnel to be managing their line and to also be managing this
quality control procedure? That's something that can be frequently overlooked where you might
have someone that's wearing an engineer that's wearing multiple hats, so to speak, and isn't
necessarily completely focused on quality. It really is ideal to make sure that there are personnel
on site that are focused specifically on QC. And then second, I mean, to this first point, though,
it's important that for the risk analysis part, that you're really understanding your product and that
if there are any issues that your product could be susceptible to, that your manufacturer could be
aware of, that they're communicating that to you.
A lot of products and manufacturers will actually have documentation called DFMEAs and
PFMEAs, and these refer to, like, design failure mode analysis and production failure mode
analysis. And so what that'll do is it will show you, you know, are there – is your product
susceptible to have certain types of issues from a design perspective and have those been
adequately addressed before going into production? And then second of all, are there specific
things with the process where something could go wrong or it's a point that, you know, should be
paid closer attention to, right? It could be something as simple as, you know, let's say you have a
consumer electronics product and the product has screws in it. There could be a specification for
how tightly the screws are screwed in or an epoxy, how much epoxy is used, or some
specification for the soldering joints on the board on your product, right? So all of these types of
processes are essential, and so making sure that your manufacturer not only has that personnel
but the processes on site to be able to manage this is absolutely the first step here, and it's
extremely important.
CJ, you want to cover number two? Yeah, just real quick before we get into number two. I want to
speak a little bit more about how you just mentioned, you know, the theory, the philosophy of the
team, and then also, you know, some of these documents and things. Well, if you go to a factory
that could present you with all of this, but if you don't have the adequate experience to
understand it and have real conversations with them about it and make sure that every detail is
being covered, then, you know, you're also kind of opening yourself up to risk because you might
say, like, oh, they seem really professional and, like, everything seems to be really thought out,
and you can kind of take that for granted, and so it's really important that you think deeply about it
and that you might want to consult someone else who has a bit more experience with
engineering, production, and things like that to make sure that they're thinking of every step.
Otherwise, there is some risk that can happen on the back end. And the same thing goes with our
second point here for production supervision. It's like, are they actually, once they provide all of
these documents, like, are they actually using them? Like, if you go into a factory for a spot check
during production, and you see someone else's product that's not even on the line, and, like,

those are the spec sheets that are taped up to the assembly line, like, I've seen that countless
times where I go in and I'm like, I got a product.
A tale as old as time. Yeah, I'm like, guys, like, how do you even know how to do this? Like, the
spec sheets haven't even been, like, you know, switched out to the proper product and things like
that, and so those are the types of things that you want to look for, and those are the kinds of
questions that you want to ask. It's like, okay, when do the spec sheets on the production line get
switched out? Who is responsible for doing that? And you really just want to follow that process
and make sure that they're doing it.
A good way to do it remotely is to just ask them for photos and videos of every single batch of
production that's going on so that you can see, okay, this person, you'll start to know, it's like,
okay, this person is the one that does the screws. You'll know that face, and then you'll see the
spec sheet, and, like, you'll know what you're looking for, and you'll be able to start to kind of draw
the right patterns. So, I mean, that would be kind of my advice to do that remotely.
Yeah. Number three here is final product inspection. How are you ensuring the final product that's
being packaged is totally acceptable? Establish go, no-go systems.
So, I think we already talked about making sure that there's, you know, the appropriate
documentation on hand from, like, a spec perspective. It's important to have your golden samples
on hand during production. As you go through the process of production, even the pre-production
process, and you begin to see some samples coming off the line, there's going to be certain,
maybe there's certain blemishes or imperfections on the product that are extremely minor that
you're okay with.
And then other times, there's certain things that can happen in production that you would
consider as critical failure that you can't accept. As you go through this process and you see units
coming off of their line, you can begin to establish acceptance criteria. You can establish kind of
these go, no-go systems where it's like, look, you know, we've seen this type of thing occur
before.
It's very minor, and this is okay. This type of, you know, this type of minor cosmetic mark might be
acceptable, but if it gets to this level, look at this reference sample here, that's not acceptable,
right? And so, by establishing this acceptance criteria, it helps to equip the manufacturer with
clear guidelines on what you're going to accept and what you're not going to accept, and it will
allow them to enforce this more effectively in production. Yeah, speaking on final product
inspections, right, like what you were just talking about with scratches and things like that, you
need to be as specific as possible.
Like, for example, if it's a one millimeter wide by five millimeter long scratch, just for example, like
that's acceptable, but if it's 1.5 millimeters wide, then that's unacceptable. And so, you really need

to like go down to the millimeter or even fraction of a millimeter with your specifications on this
when you're establishing the go, no-go systems. Generally, that's like for things like packaging or
gadgets, things that have like, you know, plastic surfaces, metal surfaces, surface finishes, things
like that.
That's a little bit different when it comes to like Nutra and skincare or, you know, beauty products.
I mean, of course, like the packaging and stuff is all still pretty applicable, but oftentimes what the
factories will do is they'll do a pilot batch beforehand with the exact raw materials that are
supposed to be used at a smaller scale. And then they'll mix it and then they'll test it and make
sure that the texture matches or the flavor matches the golden sample for if it's like a gummy or
that the color is right, if it's like a powder in a capsule or, you know, like a color cosmetic or things
like that.
And like, those are the types of reports and questions you need to be asking before each
production batch is like, okay, have you done your certificate of analysis on this? Have you gone
through and actually like remeasured all the ingredients and like made sure that all of your
machines are calibrated to go and mix it the way that we need to get it done before you go into
production? And then can you show us the sample and what the test results were before you go
ahead and clear another mass production run? And then the same thing goes for electronics,
really, like when you're doing final inspection for electronics, generally like with IQC coming in,
you'll take, you know, a set portion of batteries, which is going to be something that you and the
factory agree on. They'll probably have a standard you might want them to do more or less, but
then they'll go and do like accelerated age testing where basically what they're doing is charging
the battery as fast as possible and then letting it drain as fast as possible. And we'll do that for
like 80 cycles or 100 cycles or something like that.
And then they'll measure the max capacity, they'll measure the max voltage and things like that.
And then there's all kinds of different things for like different switches or buttons or like charging
cables and things like that, just to make sure that each batch is consistent and matches with the
standard. If they find an issue when they're doing like the accelerated age testing process with
the random spot checks, then generally they're going to reject the entire batch back to the sub
vendor and then make them do a full new QC process on it before they can start production.
And so things like that can also give you delays and it's really important to know what's going on
and when that's happening in the process. Yeah, I mean, it's great once you've established the
acceptance criteria and you are specific enough. It does also help when you're talking about like
discussions about debit notes or chargebacks to your manufacturer for defects, because then
you've already outlined these agreed upon issues.
So any escapes from that quality process is much more clearly and squarely their responsibility.
So that's great. Yeah.

So after the final product inspection, the next would just be approval to ship. They would show
you however many units selected. Like, let's say you want them to pull five random units.
The only problem with that, and this is where you really need unbiased boots on the ground for us
because they can just go ahead and pull five perfect units to give you a look at. But the rest of the
batch could have issues. So it's really important that you have someone you trust that can go
through and actually pull a few random units and give them a check before you send them out.
I mean, this is something that we at Canary always do. And we have big orders going on as we
go to the factory in the middle of production, sometimes even unannounced. We just walk into the
production room and we see what's going on.
We start picking stuff up and really just kind of making a mess and giving them a headache about
how they're going about things and just making sure that the processes are being followed. Yeah,
I mean, it's also really important, I think, to mention. It's not ideal to only have one quality
touchpoint then, one QC touchpoint when you're in production.
Because let's just imagine a scenario where you have a very important shipment. Maybe you're
shipping to retail or you're doing a product launch that you've been marketing now for weeks and
weeks leading up to a big event. And you haven't conducted any QC processes in production, but
then you go to inspect just before shipping out and suddenly you discover there's a problem.
Maybe your factory is cooperative. Maybe they really want to fix the problem and make things
right. But because of the timing and because your ship date is so quickly approaching, they're just
not able to completely rework the production and get it shipped back out in time.
So it's really essential to make sure that you have those touchpoints leading up to production and
then also have some form of an in-line QC procedure to identify these issues as early as
possible. So you don't end up in a really precarious spot right before your ship date. You might
even have your vessel booked and scheduled and you just can't make it because of the quality
issue you encounter last second.
Yeah. All right. So, yeah, let's go into just some of the risk analysis and production supervision.
So, I mean, touched on some of this already, but just whatever we haven't touched on, we could
dive in a little bit about that. Yeah, I mean, we went through this briefly on the last slide, but it's
really important. So we'll reiterate some of the key takeaways here from this.
And so you want to make sure you understand the risks and you want to make sure that you
have the documents available on the production line every time that your stuff is getting
produced. The QC documents are something that needs to be created in collaboration between
you as the brand owner and the product seller and the factory as the person who's responsible
for delivering the production and the quality control. That way, everyone is clear on the

specifications and defects can be easily called out.
You want to make sure that the team is trained and that they're following the instructions that are
given to them. So once you have that defined, you're kind of set up, you're clear go, no go. There
is a little bit of a gray area with the go, no go.
I guess that's kind of why it exists where it's like, okay, obviously you want it perfect. But having
something 100% perfect is not conducive to an efficient production process. And so sometimes
you have to give a little bit and that's where we talked about.
Okay. Hey, maybe a millimeter scratches. Okay.
But once it's a millimeter and a half, like that's, that's a no go. Right. Ideally, like zero millimeters
of scratches being being non-existent is, of course, ideal, but not always possible.
So sometimes concessions need to be made. Just make sure that everyone's clear on on what
the go, no go means. And then for reports and evidence, like just get as much photos and videos
of the process for every batch as you can, especially if you can't be there.
If you can go on, go by yourself, or if you need to hire someone to go that can be unbiased and
do it, that's probably the best bet. And then like, one question I want to ask is like, just like if
you're if you're like a beginner, you know, because I think I think like some of some of the stuff
we're talking about is it could be a little bit advanced, but like, if you're a beginner, and you don't
really know, like, for example, like a QC template, like it does sound like more in depth and, you
know, professional than what it is. But like, you know, she like CJ, when you when you started,
you know, in this space, you were you were 18 years old, right? You didn't know anything, you're
just kind of learning on the go.
So maybe just like think about yourself, like when when you were that age, and you moved to
China, and you were you were you were dealing with QC process for the brand you were working
with. So yeah, like, what would be what would be some just like real basic advice you can give on
just having some level of QC? And just try to dumb it down a little bit. Yeah, I would, I would say
just stay as patient and involved as possible.
So as as a brand owner and seller, you're really going to want to put yourself in the shoes of your
consumer, and think about how they're going to be using the product, some things that they might
be interacting with, using the product that the factory might not think about, right, the factory
might just be running through their standard process and like overlooking a key element of like
the function of the product. And so just be open minded and patient and like walk them through
some of the ideas that you have once once you understand what their QC processes and they
can explain to you step by step, really think about it and say, say to yourself, like, okay, is this
step even relevant to what the end user is going to be thinking about or interacting with when
they use the product, and then just give your ideas and try to be as specific as possible about

how they can change up. Some of their testing procedures to more reflect what what the user is
going to be experiencing.
Right. Right. So now let's, um, let's discuss like just like common mistakes in just like China
quality control.
And just like how you know how people could be avoiding them. Yeah, so here's some. Here's
three major ones.
I mean, I think that the good news is all of these are pretty avoidable. So the three that we've had
listed here, not properly evaluating supplier credibility. It's important that you're conducting the
appropriate amount of due diligence on a supplier when you decide that you're going to be
working with them.
It's helpful if you look at what their experience is, you know, have they produced this type of
product before. You know, you definitely want to be working with a manufacturer that operates in
the appropriate category. Sometimes I'll hear from people who talk about a product that they're
making, and they it's like an immediate red flag when they talk about making a certain type of,
let's say, let's say it's like a gadget type product.
And they're making it in an unusual area of China that might not have like the the appropriate
infrastructure to make that type of a product. Right. That was like an immediate red flag.
So it's good to make sure that your supplier's experience lines up with the product that they're
looking to make checking certifications and track records. The more certifications that a supplier
has, it's definitely a good sign that they take quality control that they take quality seriously. You
want to work with factors that have capabilities to be able to deliver that consistent quality.
And that goes into what we had mentioned earlier about having these different processes and
personnel in place. Sorry, CJ, you were going to say something. Yeah, I was going to chime in on
the certifications there a little bit.
I mean, you know, like GMPC stands for good, good manufacturing practice, right? Certification
and ISO is another really interesting one to look at, because these are ISOs like a certification
that actually goes. It's a company that specializes in quality control, and they'll go and do an audit
on the entire process and make sure that from design to shipping, that all of the processes are in
line with a certain number of an ISO certification, whether it's a medical device or an electronic or
health and beauty supplements. Like there's generally an ISO category for all of these different
things where they have a process that you need to align with.
And so that's another great spot to start with. If you're a beginner, just kind of familiarize yourself
with some of these different resources available and then and then communicate with your
factory about what they have. And if you need them to get something specific, then you could you

could also talk to them about that.
It's definitely a nice litmus test that you can look at right off the bat. If your factory has ISO 9001,
you know that they have certain quality procedures like their quality management processes that
they have on their side are going to be robust enough to be able to get that type of a certification.
So it is a nice litmus test.
And like you had said, different industries do have these different areas of ISO certification. So,
you know, if you're working on a medical device of any kind and your manufacturer has ISO
13485, you know, for a fact that they have a robust enough process in place to be able to support
what you need from like a quality management perspective at the very least. Yeah, after that, it's
really just making sure that again, like I was just talking about with the.
Coming from the perspective of a user, you might have to insert different steps and things here
that aren't covered along that process, but things that you would like to be tested just because
you know how the product is going to be used. Yeah, and then, you know, you might not even
think about that without being able to go and do like on site inspections or things like that. So it's
really, it's really important to be as hands on as possible.
Oh, can you go back to the last slide there? Yeah, sorry. Yeah. Number two here, not performing
on site inspections.
So, I mean, this is something, you know, that I think that we talked about, but not having a
physical any kind of physical presence that's inspecting at the factory. That's, you know, of
course, a common pitfall for people that are rushing to get their product out the door, but it's
absolutely essential to have some form of on site inspections to verify quality issues before they
leave the factory. The last thing you want to do is have a product that you've invested your time,
effort, money and reputation on that fails when it gets into the hands of customers.
Right. Yeah. Also, like, you know, sometimes, you know, like you, you're not.
Yeah, because like that's and that's why we say, like, you got to be doing like QC at the factory
level. So, you know, if you're dealing directly with the factory, you know, making sure that there
are videos and pictures being taken, it's up to you how like how involved you want to be in their
production process. Like, I remember in the beginning, like when I was doing it remotely for a little
while, like I was just trying to have them send me like their production plan just because I'm like,
oh, like, what is the process of like how you produce everything? And then, like, once I once I
understand that more, I'm like, OK, great.
So, like, there are these like stages like where you're like receiving things and and then you're
performing things. So I'm like, OK, cool. I want to see pictures and videos of when you receive
this, when you know, when it performs.

So it's like if you don't know anything, it's like you kind of got to like like talk to them and find out
how it all works. And then after you figure out how it all works, it's like, oh, now I know that I could
like just check, like do these checks and then going to the point of not being able to be there
before they finish, like doing some on site inspection. OK, so like, you know, the pictures and
video thing, of course, can can be done before things are done.
One of the things I did was also I hired like one of those like third party like quality control
companies. You don't want to look at every single product or it does get expensive, especially like
if you're doing some kind of small order, like it just won't make sense. But you can have them just
do like a random check and try to keep that the cost of using a company like that, like keep it
down.
So maybe just have them do random checks of like 10 percent and like that company will be like
more, you know, will be like a little bit more systematic in the way they do it. So like they're going
to like, you know, they'll send you like a report, they'll show you some pictures, they'll say what
they saw, you know, of the of the 20 they pulled out out of out of 100. This is kind of the
percentage of these issues versus those issues.
And then like so if you're dealing with a sourcing company like, you know, there's some QC
measures you're able to take with them or if you have somebody in-house. Now, now you have
like a bit more control over what you have to do. Just you got to you got to remember, like if if you
do have someone in-house, it's going to be on the ground there.
Like this is stuff that you need to be asking before you even hire them, because if they don't know
anything about quality control, they're not going to really know what to do. They're not going to
know what to prepare for you. And then it's going to be you like finding your way with them.
And, you know, it could just get a little challenging because now you're just spending a lot of work
like or a lot of sorry, a lot of time doing a lot of work like, you know, coaching them through it
because they're not really like thinking on their own. I think that's more of like an issue in like the
education system, like in terms of like how that goes. So it is it is important if you do have
someone in-house and on the ground that they do have like level of experience with this.
You know, that's why I like it, you know, off the bat, like for us, if we ever hire anyone like they
have to have five, five, seven years experience. Otherwise, it's just like too much learning at the
beginning. So.
OK, and then just like leaving quality control like solely to the suppliers. So do you want to just
like touch on just an experience that you had in the past, like when you did that and what was
kind of like the learning? Yeah, sure. So back many, you know, many years ago, maybe I think it
was probably at this point, eight years ago or so, I was manufacturing some soft goods, some
plush products.

And I was the supply chain for the product was we were manufacturing like the final, like the
actual final product was coming out of the Dongguan area. And throughout that process, you
know, you have to order fabric and you get the fabric. The fabric was actually sent over from
Hunan and it was being like stitched together in Hunan and then being sent down for stuffing over
in the Dongguan area.
And the manufacturer, actually, they really did generally take their quality control pretty seriously.
And they had some processes in place for in-line evaluations. But there were problems that were
occurring along the supply chain where as they were getting their product stitched together up in
Sichuan.
There was less than or sorry, up in Hunan, there was less than ideal execution on some of like
the there were like embroidery issues. And there was also just like the actual stitch joints on the
on the plush were coming out less than ideal. And so when the product was getting in to the final,
like the final Dongguan facility, there were QC issues on site that were that became really, really
difficult for them to manage.
So even though we you know, they they took their quality control seriously. And even though we
had a third party conducting these inspections, it wasn't it wasn't sufficient to effectively eliminate
the problems without kind of having a deeper dive over at the first facility. Right.
And if we hadn't had some kind of third party, there's some sort of like the 3P quality control there
assessing what the root cause was. I think it would have taken a lot longer to figure out where the
failure was occurring. Right.
And this is in the example of a manufacturer that's being cooperative. You know, you definitely
that's not always the case. So I can imagine that if you have a, you know, a manufacturer could
be disposed to, you know, try their best to ship product out.
Right. Even though there could be some minor quality issues. So it's good to make sure you have
an impartial third party there to, you know, to verify and to hold that that benchmark standard that
you're establishing.
Cool. Cool. So, yeah, let's see.
Why don't you dive into some of like the challenges with with quality control? You know, that
some of the stuff that you've experienced or some of the things that you notice, even when, like,
we take clients on trips. Yeah, I mean, language and communication is a huge one, right? You're
almost never going to run into a quality manager that's bilingual. So if you can't speak the
language, you're going to be speaking through someone who maybe doesn't understand
technical terms.
Right. And so if you're if you're talking about like, oh, you know, the tolerance on the injection

mold is, you know, too, too large or whatever. And like, they don't understand what you're saying
and then they have to go and communicate that.
And that's just like a pretty basic example. You lose a lot of time, right? Trying to communicate
the issue that you're seeing across to the person who really needs to understand what's going on.
So you often find yourself like drawing a lot of pictures or like showing him things and like
measuring stuff and like pointing.
And it just takes a lot to deal with. That's honestly why I became fluent in Mandarin, because I
was sick of dealing with that. After about two weeks, when I first got here, so I kind of forced
myself into learning it because it was just it's very frustrating.
Right. So misunderstandings happen all the time. Breakdowns in communication happen all the
time because not everyone that generally generally like when you're dealing with people in China,
they're speaking English.
They know what they've learned from being on the job, but they don't really like have a passion or
deep understanding of the technology behind a product. Right. That's what I found, at least in my
experience with most bilingual representatives at factories.
Sometimes you get like an engineer. That's the founder of the factory that speaks English. And
like you kind of hit a jackpot with those.
Right. It's kind of the type of people we look for. But language is a huge issue.
We talked a lot about the second challenge here, which is knowing how to set expectations and
being able to respond quickly to issues. I mean, if you're a beginner, knowing how to set
expectations is a long process. You're going to have to kind of get some experience under your
belt and and know exactly what you're looking for.
You're going to have to go and have a lot of hands on time. And then and then training with them
again on letting them know what the end user experience needs to be and then explaining the
things that they need to be looking out for, because their their ideas might not be aligned with
what your expectations are. And then, of course, doing all of that remotely.
Is the cherry on top of the whole challenge and you're dealing with all of the language and
communication barriers here. You're unsure of if your expectations are actually being heard and
implemented and then you're doing it from far away. And so it's.
Those are those are the main challenges with quality control. Yeah, some of the difficulty in
supervising production remotely with that we touched on, like, you know, of course, it's good to
work with trustworthy manufacturers, but like we had talked about with, like, some of the.
Incentives right when you're working on a product and you're quoted a cost for your product and
your manufacturers producing according to that cost.

And then suddenly they realize that it's a more involved challenge to try to ensure consistent high
quality of your product. Right. And so they have to implement new processes that can affect their
cycle time for manufacturing your product.
Right. Suddenly. And that adds up over time.
Right. So as you think about producing hundreds, thousands, tens, hundreds of thousands of
your product and they have to then pay that to run their machines for longer. They have to pay
their employees for longer.
They have to train their employees or maybe even higher on some QC personnel to ensure that
level of quality. It adds fixed and variable costs to their equation. And I'm sure that when they've
quoted you a certain price, you're expecting quality to begin with.
Right. And so it's important to remember, then, that there's there's like there is that kind of
intersection point, that conflict naturally between the fact that it will cost them money to potentially
to ensure this level of quality and to ensure that you're getting what you need. Right.
And so that's why it is helpful to have that that additional level of supervision on site, whether it's
through a sourcing company or through someone on your team that's able to go in or through
third party inspection firms to make sure that these these processes are in place and that they're
being regularly utilized. I have a great real life example, actually, from a recent from a recent
client that came to us. He was selling an EMS device and he had a quality issue where people
were having allergic reactions.
And so he found out about us, hit us up, wanted to come out to China. We took him to a few
different spots to go and check out what was up with these patches. And when we were speaking
with the owner of the one factory, who's an amazing engineer, he was explaining that, you know,
they have three or four different suppliers for patches, but only one of them has almost zero
complaints for allergic reactions.
And they're 30 to 40 percent more expensive for that patch. And so, you know, they let that they
let their customers know that. But it took a lot of trial and error, obviously, for them to get to that
point.
He said some people are still wanting to cut corners and take the cheaper ones. Some people
are willing to pay the price and get the more expensive ones. But like those those are the types of
things you see after trial and error with QC that can affect your pricing.
Like you might have to switch sub vendors. You might have to switch materials and it could affect
your price. Right.
So really try to keep an open mind and offer the best product available. And then, you know, if the

price goes up a little bit and the price goes up a little bit, you know, at the end of the day, we're all
here to scale long term, sustainable businesses. Right.
Yeah. All right. So, yeah, just so I kind of like wrap this up.
You know, I just think some key takeaways and I know the content for something like this is kind
of dense. So if you have to like reach out to us about any questions or just like, you know, ask
kind of about your situation, we're always happy to answer. She's always on discord, you know, in
the community.
So he's he's able to address anything. But, you know, it does like quality control in China. It's not
like a set it and forget it system.
Like you do need to have like a lot of oversight. And I do think that, you know, on site supervision
greatly reduces risk. You don't have to like check every single order.
Like that's not what this is really about. You know, otherwise, like, you know, you're like creating
this like full time job. And then like in some I remember when I was like getting a little too
micromanaging with it, like I'm like, why am I spending so much time? Like, you just got to do it
randomly.
You got to have your systems in place. You got to have like your checkpoints. You got to, you
know, just keep keep in the beginning, maybe do a lot because you want to keep them automatic
with the system you have for them.
But, you know, when you have people on the ground, it like just removes a lot of that that
annoying time you're spending. Now, if you just focus on like the marketing and scaling and then
just like making sure you're you're, you know, you're partnering with the right people to handle it.
You know, could be a company like us.
It could be someone that you hire in-house. I could be another sourcing company. But, you know,
you can't be you can't really have a factory as a partner to perform QC for you because like, you
know, the interests aren't necessarily going to be aligned there.
Trade companies, they're just not as transparent because sometimes it just poses as a factory.
So there are good ones out there. So I'm not going to say, like, don't work with a trade company.
But like, you know, the ones that are a bit more transparent, you know, in a way, they are
functioning like a sourcing company, too. But don't work with a fulfillment company to handle your
QC because they because they do get paid to ship your product. Right.
Exactly. That's a fundamental conflict against how they make money. Yeah.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. And I think like that's kind of like, you know, the mindset that we are trying

to to break here.
So, yeah, I think this was like a pretty good topic. And, you know, we'll go into the next one.



======================================================================
FILE: Intro - Chadzone - Evolve Finance Evolve.txt
======================================================================

Intro - Chadzone - Evolve Finance Evolve
What's up guys? I hope you're excited for this module. It's going to be covering everything on the
LTV, the cash conversion cycle. If you haven't met me before, my name is Grayson.
I've been in e-commerce last 10 years, generated over $2 billion in e-commerce revenue. I'm
currently managing over $100 million a month in subscription LTV revenue. So I'm very excited to
share with you today how you can run your ad account at a 0.5 ROAS and make more profit than
you're currently running on without ever having to lose money to make money later.
A lot of e-commerce people say, oh, we got to lose money month one, month two, which we'll get
into the fine details of that in a little bit, but I'll actually be able to show you how to never have
money leave your bank account while still generating positive contribution margin while spending
at a 0.5 in your ad account. It's going to be really exciting to see. If you have any questions about
this, feel free to reach out directly to me on Discord.
More than happy to help you out. I'm really excited to put together this module for you guys today.
If you have a good understanding, you're going to notice that these are broken into a couple
different videos, with the first video of this module being very simple, getting more and more and
more and more complex as the series goes on.
So very excited to be presenting this to you today. And again, if you have any questions, just let
me know. Thanks.



======================================================================
FILE: Last Minute CNY Prep - 2026 - Evolve Supply Chain Program Evolve.txt
======================================================================

Last Minute CNY Prep - 2026 - Evolve Supply Chain Program Evolve
How's it going Chris and Sijing? Just wanted to kick this call off with you and just talk about
Chinese New Year last minute prep. I think we all know what Chinese New Year is about. It starts
around February 17th and typically around this time it's always just a madhouse in China
because everyone's trying to get their last minute orders in.
I think I want to use this call just to go over a lot of our experiences but then also at the same time
just what people are able to do when you're kind of like at the last minute of needing to place
maybe orders or come up with things you can do that will help you be in a good position for post
Chinese New Year like a couple days after. So I'm going to leave the floor to you guys and let's
just talk about what are things that people are doing right now to be in preparation and then look
in there. What do you think CJ? Yeah so I mean right now we're in the middle of January.
It's January 12th as we're recording this call. For our clients at Canary we started in like midDecember letting people know that you needed to get orders in by late December just so that we
had these first few weeks in January to kind of plan and get stuff set up to make sure that
deliveries are happening before Chinese New Year. Right now in mid-January you know
depending on the product you're doing there might be like a couple days of room really this week
to get things in.
If not you're already looking towards like what post Chinese New Year delivery schedules are
looking like. So it's really important to be proactive up until this point but right now it's a little bit of
playing damage control and just kind of trying to figure out what you could get what you can get
done realistically before Chinese New Year and maybe kind of shifting your plans for what
February is going to look like. Yeah exactly and I think that it's important not to just think about
this pre-Chinese New Year period right now where you're thinking oh you know what can I get out
the door before Chinese New Year before the holiday before the shutdowns.
It's also important to think about prioritization on the manufacturer's side immediately following
the holiday right. So I think a lot of what we're going to be going through today and
recommending is taking steps to ensure that you're able to hit the ground running immediately
following the holiday. Yeah so like what sets Chinese New Year apart from other long holidays in
China.
I mean like we know in October there's a long one, May there's kind of a long one as well. But
with Chinese New Year you know it's the largest you know humid migration in the world where all
the Chinese people are going to their hometowns for the New Year. It's a struggle to get you
know train and plane tickets for all of them to go back.
It gets really crazy and so what ends up happening is like I know Greg you said it starts February
17th but a lot of factory workers specifically like assembly line workers, administrative workers,

people that kind of are working in the back end to get things done but aren't you know necessarily
essential to the operation. They all kind of start leaving and factories are starting to scramble to
try to keep up with things. So you know if you had a product that was you know maybe 15-20 day
lead time generally before Chinese New Year you're going to be looking at twice as long of the
lead time and that also has to do with just congestion in the production planning because
everyone is trying to get their orders in at the same time and so factories are really trying to figure
out and optimize their schedule going up to Chinese New Year because even though it's
February 17th that it actually starts it's like the first official day of the holiday like the first official
federal holiday in China.
You know a week to 10 days before that things are already getting shut down. I believe like the
last date for like shipments leaving China is like February 8th or February 10th something like
that depends on you know what shipping line you're actually using and so really like that last
week between like the 10th and the 17th you're not really getting anything done and especially
with like the China 3PLs around the 17th is when a lot of them are going to be shutting down and
they'll be shut down for a week too so it's also important to think about you know how you're
going to be fulfilling stuff for this period of time. And the same thing come back right so when they
come back a lot of workers have left and they need to ramp up their their labor force again to be
able to go back into like normalcy of what production lead times look like and so coming back
from Chinese New Year you know I think they're back like last week of February first week of
March but you're not going to be getting normal production capacities again until mid-March.
So it sounds like based upon what you what we've discussed here already and what we've gone
over there's probably four major areas then of like serious tactical preparation that would be good
to consider at this point in time before Chinese New Year and I would say the first of that is
production and supplier tactics like engaging with your manufacturer on more tactical measures
before the holiday. The second is payment and leverage. The third would be shipping and other
inventory workarounds to try to salvage shipments going out the door right before this holiday and
then hitting the ground running immediately post-holiday.
And then finally and this seems to be a repeating theme and everything that we've just talked
about here but expectation management and communication. So does it make why don't we just
go ahead Ben and step through each of these in a little bit more detail starting off with like the
production and supplier side. Do you think that there's any like uh uh best like best questions or
communications that should be going out to your manufacturers about production at this point?
Yeah I was yeah I was gonna I was gonna say like if if we could use a couple of um like just like
product examples that can kind of like give people I don't know like if you're not if you're not very
prepared but like you're you're dealing with like longer lead times like we are we're a month out
and I feel like if if packaging is a bottleneck in any kind of way I feel like you could still like not
bust out like a bunch of packaging orders you know what I mean just to kind of be like keep your
lead times a little bit shorter for right after Chinese New Year because I would imagine maybe

certain forms of packaging if it's at very high volume you'll only get like some produced not all but
that could be like maybe a quick thing you can do to kind of just help out with like at least making
your lead time shorter uh post Chinese New Year what do you think? Yeah I think I think
packaging is a great example of what I'm going to start to refer to as like just like a larger subvendor type of material supplier right because it it's not just one material that goes into making a
product right you're going to need packaging you can need other raw materials plastics metals
you know it all depends on what product you're making but like nothing is generally nothing is
made all under one roof and so you're you're starting to see some of these lead time delays uh
due to production capacity going up to Chinese New Year across the board so like if you're if
you're working at a factory and you need to produce you know it inject plastic and get bought and
get um you know box packaging or something like that prepared you know then your factory is
dealing with their sub-vendors that are going to be providing them with those raw materials and
they're going through the same capacity issues as everyone else so the first question that you
should be asking is you know what does the raw material lead time look like going up to Chinese
New Year and after Chinese New Year and how much do I need to purchase now or put a
deposit in on now to be able to operate smoothly for the last order before Chinese New Year but
then also ensure once we get back that we can hit the ground running.
And to Greg's point as he was talking about the example of packaging a great question to be
asking your supplier if they're not able to get your order out before Chinese New Year ask to see
what type of partial shipment could be achieved and then if there's some limiting reagent some
limiting factor let's say it's packaging or other materials try to find out some way to either get a
partial shipment or partial commitment from that sub component supplier or find a way that you
might be able to either pressure or incentivize them to try to deliver on that partial quantity so that
you can equip your supplier with the materials that they need to rush your order. Yeah yeah
relying and relying entirely on the factory's resources themselves yeah it might not be the best
option you might want to ask them where their pain points are and see if there's anything you
could do on your own to try to mitigate some of that. If I was to like let's say that I'm I don't know
either manufacturing like a gadget or a manufacturing like a supplement product and I want to
place an order right now you know just to maybe queue myself up for I mean I think prior to
Chinese New Year it's going to be a little bit of a tight schedule but like if for right after like what
are what's going to be like the lead time situation right when like people are back from Chinese
New Year because I think we could get into kind of like happens in terms of the factory's like staff
you know labor staff because a lot of the times they're kind of operating at like half capacity like
the first week back.
Yeah that's a really good point it's important to remember that as you're planning right let's say
that you are let's say you just launched a product last holiday let's say it's a gadget and your sales
have been really strong and you've had good volume and you're ramping up on your sales and
you're trying to assess and closely monitor your manufacturer's capacity right now you might
have a schedule from your manufacturer that says okay look February 17th and the official

holiday is two weeks long right maybe that is the case where definitely the office staff and some
portion of their labor workforce on the line on the actual production line comes back on time but
like CJ mentioned earlier this there's this holiday period is one of the biggest migrations in the
world every single year right and there are travel delays there are things that can and do occur
during the holiday season that either delay workers coming back after the holiday or sometimes
the workers don't even come back and manufacturers have to shore up their labor position
immediately post-holiday to ramp back up so if you're making assumptions about your
manufacturer's capacity it's important to maintain open communication with them about what
you're looking to achieve and try to make sure that there's contingency planning in place to make
sure that the production line is able to quickly ramp up post-holiday. Yeah I would say one of the
most common themes that are you know my 10 plus years of being here in China is like going to
China before Chinese New Year to make sure that what your supplier is telling you is actually
happening you're going and visiting all the sub vendors and making sure that they're actually
working on your stuff you're going and visiting your factory to actually see the plans that they're
laying out to be able to assemble things for you you know then you go home for Chinese New
Year and then come back again immediately in the spring to do the same thing like to just
actually make sure that that things are going on and it's definitely been something I've seen you
know just over the years of being out here. Got it okay yeah yeah I always like I think it would be
fun if we could like just like chat about any kind of like experiences we've had in the past where
it's roughly a month before Chinese New Year and like we're trying to put it in order and like just
like over the years like before our careers at Canary you know like what kind of stuff have you
gone through or any kind of any kind of strategies maybe you use to just like be in a good
situation before Chinese New Year or just putting yourself in a really good position after Chinese
New Year like would any anything that comes to mind in terms of like things you did where you're
like oh wow actually wasn't such a bad idea.
I want to touch on the topic of shipping really quickly here because CJ had mentioned this earlier
in the call but you know I remember one year where we were rushing a product launch and this is
maybe maybe eight years ago we were rushing a product launch for a highly visible program and
we were able to secure production in January and get our order ready to ship out from the
manufacturer but it was just before Chinese New Year and we unfortunately at that time did not
have the foresight to book the ocean container in advance right before the holiday so we had
been you know highly pressuring our manufacturer to get the order done they achieve it and we
celebrate and then we actually went to look at the vessel schedule and our shipment couldn't get
picked up for two weeks and more than two weeks actually so it was you know it was a serious
nightmare it went from like a celebration to pretty much a disaster from a planning perspective
and so a lesson that I learned there is whilst you're approaching this Chinese New Year period
make sure that you're communicating with your logistical partners whether it's your freight
forwarder or shipping partners or even warehousing partners as well to make sure that your
product can be shipped and stored effectively during this period. Yeah definitely definitely
booking freight earlier than later that's that's something that I've had experience with too in the

past it's just you know you're we're here in mid-January booking containers for mid-February right
now actually like even even just today there's there's a client that I know of that we're you know
we we're starting to pay surcharges on the containers which are only going to go up like right now
I think it's like $80 a container that we're having to pay extra just to like guarantee containers for
us and that's just through like the next two weeks as soon as we get into February that might like
even double or triple. If anyone's listening to this video right now that has a shipment that's
getting ready like to ship before Chinese New Year and that's the intention please make your
booking today.
100% oh my god I'll like never forget when I had to get containers out before Chinese New Year
but besides just like the surcharges like there there's so many people that are shipping at the
same time that sometimes like a container that's like scheduled for like that upcoming week they
end up having to roll it to the next week because like there's way too much congestion yeah oh
that's like one of the things that gets like really frustrating around this time it's just like you know
you become a little powerless with like what you're able to get out the the door just because
everyone else is doing it so and then I mean COVID was like crazy with shipping prices but also
yeah the prices of shipping containers tend to get a little more expensive than usual too just
because you're competing with a lot of like space so yeah it's it's always like a mess and then I
would say like I want to like shift gears and kind of just say like because like right now like I know
I've talking I've spoken to like a lot of companies that are just starting to think about like the new
products that they want to do for the year because like usually right after like Q4 some people are
already have like their plans figured out for like pre-Chinese New Year with their inventory but
what about people doing like product development right now like what kind of sampling do you
think can get done between now and a month from now or what steps can you take with trying to
do a product launch right after Chinese New Year or a month after just let's go over kind of a little
bit like the product development stuff that that people are able to do right now to just like getting
either get ahead of the curve or just like keep things at a good speed so that when there is that
disruption you're you know not annoyed about it basically. Yeah I mean quarter one is something
that we always preach about being the time for product development you just had a really big Q4
you're looking in the next year with some ideas maybe some new products you want to test
maybe it's something that you've been designing for a while so January is a great time to start
getting samples of that stuff done I would say the main goal is to be able to try to verify the
sample that you actually want to move into production with that way you can move forward with
the tooling process before Chinese New Year. The steel manufacturers that actually supply you
know like the raw steel that gets cut into molds go on holiday quite a bit earlier than other
factories right I'd want to say like some of the steel manufacturers we've been speaking to are off
as soon as January 15th like by the end of this week they're kind of done being able to like take
orders and ship things before Chinese New Year but you can definitely get your materials preordered so that once they come back from Chinese New Year the steel is ready and you can start
cutting steel and making molds.

I mean procuring the steel is like the first week to 10 days of the 30-day tooling process so if you
can get ahead of the game on getting your steel ordered and like have stuff start kind of showing
up at the factory either right before Chinese New Year or right when Chinese New Year is over
you have a big leg up going into Q2 you know with a new product that's tooled and ready to go so
it's really important to get all of your samples dialed in make a punch list with your samples figure
out exactly what needs to get addressed and solved before you get into tooling and then be ready
to make that mold deposit before Chinese New Year. Yeah yeah yeah with uh yeah because I got
I'm actually you know it's kind of funny we can kind of like not bust out a little work while we're on
this call like with like just some of like the ODM projects that we're doing um like let's um like
without like revealing like you know just to be like keep things like confidential for our clients but
like I know what we're working on a couple of um gadget devices in the in the pet space like what
kind of like ID like industrial design you think could get done um during right now like if you have
like our engineers like still working and like when do they typically check out before you know
Chinese New Year because obviously like with the factories like they they all close down and
stuff but maybe there's some like you know design stuff that you can maybe get done right now
um on like a custom gadget for example. Yeah the engineers and the R&D teams at factories are
quite a bit of a different situation because you know maybe they're needed a little bit in production
um just as things are moving along to make sure that they're following QC processes and things
like that especially with new products but other than that at this point in time is when the
engineer's time really frees up and so they have a lot of extra time to work on other products help
you test things help you get samples done and so at this time product development moves a little
bit more efficiently than at other times of the year in China.
Yeah I agree it's just kind of echoing what you said a few minutes ago here now is the time if
you're able to finalize on whether it's uh sculpting prototyping sampling if you're able to get to
move things forward for verification during that Chinese New Year downtime it's really this is the
time to make those final steps forward. Okay okay um yeah not bad not bad um I'm just trying to
think of like any other like help that we could like provide people in the eval community that could
be of um just like some kind of like pro tips or or something like that how about like in how about
how about um for how about for those like I don't want to really touch on fulfillment because like
we don't we don't really do fulfillment every fulfillment company kind of has like their own
schedule and whatnot uh but but let's talk about like let's talk about some hybrid shipping for a
minute for a minute right like what what are your thoughts on doing like a mixture of like air freight
shipment to a US 3PL and then like sea freight just because like with with sea freight you are
dealing with like more congestion maybe some like um situations where you know it's gonna it
could potentially end up showing up later than than usual like percentage of a shipment and let's
use it for probably use it for we'll do a mixture of like lightweight goods and heavy goods because
maybe there's a different strategy on hybrid shipping but like yeah what are your thoughts on
doing like air freight shipments and what percentage of your you know stock would you if you
want to send out I think that what's important for every brand owner to be assessing right now is

they need to be looking at their baseline current inventory position here you know we're right after
a serious holiday period with black friday cyber monday and christmas all in this last two months
here so it's important that brand owners number one look at their baseline current inventory
number two look at everything that they have in transit uh number three look at everything that
they have in production okay and then from there they need to assess what is their current sales
forecast and run rate that they're going to have on their inventory and do an inventory roll forward
right they need to look and see how like how many days of supply are they going to have during
this chinese new year period to try to come up with an initial plan right because to your point it
can vary depending on the weight of the goods you need they need to take a look at just their
profit margin on the product right if it costs you like if it if it costs you uh your product costs let's
say 100 bucks to make and then to ship it and let's say you're selling it for let's say you're selling it
for 200 bucks or for 250 but then your product weighs so much that it ends up costing you to air
freight something like 35 pop and then your customer acquisition cost is you know let's say it's it
gets you to break even almost maybe you have still have an appetite right to to to operate on
break-even terms but you might want to be very very tight and play it close in terms of how much
you would air freight you might want to really minimize it for a lighter product on the other hand
you might be able to get away with air freighting a little bit more buffer to secure your inventory
position and ensure that you don't have any sales disruption but i think it's important for someone
to assess what their bottom line is on each product look at that profit margin and make sure that
uh number one that it works from a unit economics perspective and number two they need to
assess the potential for sales disruption during that period yeah if you're if you're running like a
hybrid model the real time that matters is only that week or 10 days or however long it is that your
china 3pl is going to be you know out on and it might be feasible for you to air freight like a week's
worth of inventory over you know maybe it's just a couple pallets or a couple cases of goods and
you're not filling like a full container that's going to go you know see freight to some us 3pl or you
know wherever it is if it's abroad um so yeah really really just look at like chris what you were
saying like where your inventory positions are what you actually need to ship out and then even if
you have to split up a shipment that you wanted to send to the to the us and you're you're
banking on it being a sea break shipment really just pay attention to what that week looks like and
try to make sure you have a minimum amount of inventory to be able to sell so that you don't
have to turn your ads off during that week because that's the last thing you want to do is like okay
now your ads are turned off uh you know chinese new year's here you're not shipping from china
you've got stuff stuck on the water you're not going to be able to get inventory for a while after
chinese new year is over and then things slow down drastically and so taking that extra cost even
if it's breakeven or even if it's at a little bit of a loss just to keep the momentum um could totally be
worth it but you need to be able to have your numbers organized um so that you can calculate
exactly what that looks like for you yeah yeah um okay um i got another i got another topic but
that's we actually spoke about this uh last week for one of our clients but for all of those like q4
heavy businesses like usually you're pretty good with like your your ordering right now because
like you kind of like scaled back down and like you're you know you're kind of like recalibrating uh

essentially but like what are some things that you should be doing if you know you're a um you're
q4 heavy and uh you want to like just like and you're maybe you're planning to scale i don't know
uh 3x or 2x uh the upcoming year like what kind of negotiations can you be doing right now um to
just like get yourself you know set up well for for the for the new year so essentially like i think
what what we were talking about is like if you have if you're dealing with a product that you might
have to go with like multiple factories for like this is kind of like the perfect time to go over your
forecast so that you can start to figure out okay hey like this is what i'm going to be producing for
the year i need to like like you almost want to like reverse engineer kind of like what terms you
can get with them or pin them against each other if it's multiple factories at the same time um
yeah what like i think you know who i'm like referencing about this and like what would you say
your game plan would be uh for those like q4 heavy businesses where it's like hey we need to hit
the reset button and we need to negotiate something better we need better payment terms we
need better pricing the bomb costs like what what you know what's your what's your plan of
attack uh especially for like that client if they're listening to this call since they're in the community
they know uh they're probably going to want to know what our game plan is yeah i mean so so
and and this is and this is actually what what this client was doing too and it's a it's a really smart
move like if you're a q4 heavy business you're going into qq1 and like pre-chinese new year with
with some heavy cash flow right you know you know that your volume is not going to be what it
was in q4 you just sold a shit ton of product and you can come to the table and say like all right
here's what q1 looks like i'm ordering all of this now for january february and march and then
we're going to do it all again in march and then you start kind of trying to go quarter by quarter or
even uh you know six months to eight months at a time and really just go like as far out as you
possibly can just to make sure that you and your factories are on the same page with what needs
to get done before chinese new year and then coming back right away um and you know q1 i
would say be a little bit more lenient with them you know just give give them exactly what you
need you know kind of try to play nice and then when you come back in q2 you say like okay hey
if you want this to keep going as stable as you know q1 went like my q2 needs to look like this
and my volume is going to look a lot better than like what q2 did last year even what q1 just was
for us and so you start figuring out all right you know what are some cost saving uh opportunities
what things are you going to be doing differently after chinese new year uh that are going to aid
me like what types of terms are you going to be able to give me after chinese new year based on
what we just did in q4 together how i just paid for everything up front in q1 because i'm coming in
cash heavy and now in q2 it's like cool now it's time for you to give back to me because we we've
just done all of this business together so it's a really good opportunity maybe maybe it's not like
product development necessarily like we were just talking about but it's like you know business
development where it's like hey if we just keep doing the same thing we're running the same
product that's been scaling and it's extremely stable uh what are certain milestones you need to
see what are certain price breaks i can get and then finally like what types of terms are you willing
to give me and then just see who's willing to give you the best deal and then you give them that
deal yeah yeah yeah no i think um i think like the negotiations that go on uh for the q4 heavy

businesses i always find to be like the most interesting because like you're pretty much it's like so
crazy how like timing works but like you're just like you you you you make them feel that that like
q4 is around the corner again you know and like it's it's time to just like get a better deal than than
before and like the you know you do some relationship building too um maybe let's talk about like
the gift giving type of stuff during chinese new year like for those that you know uh do have very
close relationships with their suppliers like what can they do uh to kind of like i don't know
massage the relationship a little bit more around this time i think the first thing that i would
mention is yeah like the chinese new year period is when these manufacturing partners also
historically give out bonuses to their entire workforce to their entire staff and so if there are any
outstanding dues owed bills i would definitely encourage payment of any past due balances
before chinese new year it will go a long way in your discussions with your supplier uh because
again this is the period when they are giving out those bonuses to their entire uh to their entire
workforce yeah um and and chinese new year too is when they have like their annual parties like
just like christmas is in the west or whatever where they get the whole company together they
invite all of their key vendors together you have like this huge banquet of a dinner with like
hundreds sometimes thousands of people um you know try to get yourself there if if you're if
you're a vip client or like trying to be trying to be building these relationships like come to china
before chinese new year meet your factory owners sit down at the table with them have a nice
meal celebrate all the success that you guys had together uh throughout the past year and and
just show that face and like take this as a time to build a relationship bring some gifts that are
hard to come by in china like from whatever country you're from whatever delicacies or
specialties or whatever that you have you know bring to them maybe maybe if uh you know you
have a traditional holiday treat you know from the country where you're from that they don't have
in china you can bring that and say like hey like when we're celebrating the new year and the
holiday season with my family like this is what we do and so i wanted to be able to share this
experience with you and bring that to you like it doesn't it doesn't need to be something uh that
you need to think too hard about you know they appreciate the smaller gestures and learning
more about our cultures and so like you can get yourself into these annual parties and you can
start bringing gifts not only to the owner but to the engineers to the production managers and you
make that extra effort to just like kind of make them feel special um even if you can't make it you
know send them a little care package and a note and say like hey you know here are gifts for
these certain people i want to make sure that when you're doing your company party your annual
party that like someone gets on stage and says hey this is from our vip customer whoever and he
wanted to make sure that you guys felt recognized so we want to call the whole team that worked
on this project up uh to be recognized by a client you know you can you can phone in on video or
whatever if it's if it's not convenient for you to go but something like that goes a really long way
and i've seen that done at uh you know several annual parties in in china yeah oh man i'm like
just like talking about this i'm actually like remembering when um like cj you've been to you've
been to like supplier's like hometown during chinese new year right like where they just like invite
you to be with like their family and i gotta say like it's like i'm like taking a hit for the team when i'm

going sometimes because it's just like so over the top like you i end up it's uh when i was it's like
the biggest party ever oh my god i was in like the vape industry and like oh my god they they they
took me all around and like their friends houses and stuff like that and i mean that's the beauty of
like you know chinese culture right like they're so hospitable that um you know it really this is like
really a perfect time to like really like become good friends with them and almost be like part of
their family and i gotta say like the the deeper you go into the relationship and this is where like it
is kind of like a strategic move um you know build like building a good relationship is um this is
how you get preferential treatment right if we're gonna just like bring this back to like business for
a second like with the relationship building aspect like this is how you're able to like maybe get
like like i said extra favors but like they're they're gonna just remember that like you you did them
a solid and like what what if you're like a you know in in not their top client but like you're in the
top 10 but you went the distance on on meeting with them just like think about like what that
factory owner now is gonna is gonna do for you because like you you know you you you really
show them how much you care about them as people not just like your supplier that needs to
make you your stuff and like they're gonna like try to push people to help you out and it's like it's
important you know to to get all the help you can get um especially when you're competing up
against much bigger companies potentially um and you're not like the top client so um you know
that's that's like the other big like advantage if you really get deep into a into a relationship with a
supplier in a Chinese area. Yeah i mean like i'm i'm a musician i play drums and when when i
when i was like running product development for for a different brand and and just living out here
we would get a band together and we would go and like do a performance at their annual party
and like that meant the world to them like maybe we weren't their largest customer or anything
but just like little gestures like that like that's that's how you guarantee like they prioritize your
business before and after Chinese New Year like they know that you're here for the long run
they're no they know that you're committed um and and it's just it's the small gestures they really
go a long way.
Yeah um all right i think like i mean i hope i hope that this is like helpful for everyone in the
community i know like if you if you're not prepared you know during Chinese New Year it's like
kind of tough because you know you're you're scrambling around for those that are prepared like
it's a good chance for you to get more on like the offense and just like try to work more on your
your forecast for the year if anything um but yeah i feel like this was like an important call for us to
do for everybody just uh just to give them some some general like guidelines and things to be
thinking about you know prior to you know Chinese New Year which is coming up but to close to
close this uh up you guys have anything else you want to say as like a you know like a quick tip
or or something you should be mindful of um you know with like the last minute prep i would say
my key takeaway or the key one of the key takeaways that i would encourage people listening to
do is really communicate communicate communicate making sure that your expectations align
with your major partners whether it's a manufacturing partner or whether it's another service
provider along the way logistics warehousing or other ensuring that your expectations are aligned
with those of the people that you're working your key you know your key partners that's what's the

most important during this period yeah if there's if there's ever a time to micromanage it's now uh
you know asking them every day like is this delayed is it on time what are you doing to make sure
that it's happening and and doing it every single day that way if there ever is a change that you
know right away and you can start kind of trying to plan on how to deal with it yeah all right well i
think this was uh this is the best advice we can give for for right now and um you know if anyone
like needs anything or or just has any questions for us i mean you can always go to our website
and just hit us up um you know to schedule a call um we're always we always take we always
take calls like even even if it's not to like potentially work with us just like if you if you just want to
like know more i mean uh we're all available uh to just answer any questions that people have um
or think through things so you know don't be shy to just like reach out just as you know help you
know we're not we're i don't think the purpose of this call really is to like us to win business or
anything like that i think it's just more about like you know uh evolve community is awesome i
think like everyone it's a pretty tight-knit community and you know the the idea of these ecom
communities is to you know to be able to help each other so you know if you guys have any
questions you could contact me cj press uh john um and uh you know we'll be more than happy
to answer any questions you have yeah and uh also greg and i are in the discord if you have any
like just quick questions feel free to ping us send us a dm um and and we'll chop it up



======================================================================
FILE: Meta Billing - How to Still Pay With Credit Cards - Evolve Finan.txt
======================================================================

Meta Billing - How to Still Pay With Credit Cards - Evolve Finan
What's up guys, Grayson here to give you the absolute most saucy sauce you've ever seen of
your life. So as some of you guys are aware, Meta is changing, they are no longer accepting
credit cards and this is probably the best thing to ever happen to you. I've been preaching this a
long time before this has even changed, but I'm going to walk you through how the Meta invoice
change is actually going to unlock unlimited profit for your business.
I'm going to reference a couple other videos in here, but this is probably the best thing to ever
happen, especially if you're in e-commerce, specifically subscription-based e-commerce. All right,
let's talk about this. We've got three ways that people pay their Meta invoices.
We're going to start from the left on the Virgin, then we'll go the Decent, and then the Chad
Scaling side of it. The Virgin is how a lot of people get started, and if you've already seen the
figure out of this league, feel free to skip forward, but this is how a lot of people get started. I'll
make myself a little smaller here.
A lot of people get started with this with the very, very simple way of Meta sends me a bill and I
pay it with my bank account or my credit card, or my debit card, excuse me, immediately. They
usually bill in $800 to $2,000 increments. You get billed, you pay it, and that's it.
The pros are on this, this is the only pro about this, is you never have any kind of debt. Now,
there's a mental effort here. I had to go through this a lot as I started growing my career.
Debt is actually a very, very good thing. Growing up, I was taught debt is awful. We don't want it.
There are different kinds of debt, but debt is usually a very, very good thing if it is structured
correctly, and you are disciplined with the way you run your business. The cons on this, the bad
things, is it's actually the worst thing you could ever do for the capital of your business, for the
health of your business, and the growth of your business. There's not a lot of good things I can
really say about that, which is why this is FT or Virgin style, worst thing you can really do, which is
why I want to move more towards, this is what I see pretty often, and this is the decent 30-day
meta billing, and this is what's going away.
This is the paying things with a credit card. This will no longer exist. This is probably you.
This is probably you right now. Meta bills you every $800 to $2,000. You usually pay it with either
Amex Gold or the Chase Sapphire.
You get net 30 to pay it off, aka you get your statement, you get 30 days to pay it off, and that's
about it. Super straightforward. Pros on this.
Gives you more time to pay credit cards, giving you a larger cash conversion cycle. So if you
haven't watched the other videos I've done, a cash conversion cycle is the time in which you

spend your money until you get a profit. Net 30 credit cards are a great example.
If I'm acquiring subscriptions from an e-commerce brand or LTV in general, and I have a net 90 or
net 60, whatever the acquisition window is, where I do not make money on an acquisition for a
profitable contribution margin until 90 days out, this helps soften the blow. Net 30 terms, this
helps quite a bit. Additionally, airline and Amex points add up at large scale.
This is a nice to have. I'm not going to discredit this. A lot of the reason why people spend
advertising dollars on credit cards is because it is a non-taxable event, which allows you to go on
great trips, get upgrades to first class, get hotels, get food, get cash back, all of these things
which are great for the owner and the lifestyle of the business, which doesn't really affect your
P&L or your profit and loss statements.
A big problem about it is it doesn't matter. It's going away. You can't do this anymore.
The era of meta is going to be over. I wouldn't be surprised if they walk it back, give us another
30, 60, 90 days to get this taken care of, but the official word is we have like April. We have April
to get this done, which brings in, in my opinion, the best way of doing this ever, the Chad.
This is what I preach. I've been preaching this for years. This is how you can scale a business
from zero to $5 million in like six months without having any capital, without having no money.
This is the best way of doing it, the Chad scaling meta billing workflow. All right, first thing, net
invoicing. This has existed forever.
Most people just don't use it. I don't know why. I mean, I do know why, but most people just don't
use it.
Invoicing on meta has existed forever. It's been a thing forever. You'll notice that a lot of the
really, really large scale businesses use it.
I'm going to explain why. It's a 30-day net term, but they technically have a 15-day grace period.
We'll say 14 days because you don't want to pay on your 15th day and get totally screwed, but
let's just say net 45 for meta.
It's 30 plus 15 because that's their grace period. This is where this gets complicated. I'm going to
open your eyes to the world of the future of meta billing.
Using a third party to pay your invoice because meta is going to make you pay this via wire
transfer, ACH. They will not allow you to pay this with a credit card. Paying with a third party.
Now, I have three options here. I've got Melio, Bill.com, and Plastic. All of these are great.
You're going to pay a fee between 2.5 to 2.9%. It's going to be closer to 2.9 depending on how

long your business is around, but let's just say 2.9. Melio is my personal favorite because you can
get set up in like 30 minutes and run on it like that. It takes no time and you can start running on it
immediately. I know people who've put a million dollars through it pretty quickly and have had no
problem getting anything approved, but Melio is probably my favorite.
Again, what these tools allow you to do is to take your meta invoice and pay it with a credit card.
Now, I know a lot of you, your brains are already thinking, you're like, oh, I see where we're going
with this. I see how this makes sense.
Using the Chad credit card to pay. Now, I'd say a lot of people use the Amex gold card. We're
going to rank these in like F tier to absolute S plus, and I think the American Express gold card is
like F tier.
I don't want to explain why. A lot of people use this thing. I'm not a huge fan of it for many
reasons.
A lot of people see the 3X, 4X, whatever their deal is on points. It's only for the first $150,000.
After that, it goes back to normal and it's just not even worth it.
When you think about it like that, it's just not even worth it, right? Now, we've got like the middle
of the road. This is a really good credit card. It's just the platinum, super standard.
There's some others out there that I'm going to talk about in a second, but the platinum is like the
go-to. You usually get the highest limit on the platinum and you get 2% back on all purchases
over $5,000, aka this is what we're going to be using it for. Then the first $2,000,000, it's only for
the first $2,000,000, you get that 2% back.
Then after that, it drops to 1%. When you get past a certain scale level, this doesn't make sense
either because now you're only getting 1% back, but it's unlimited 1%, which helps. Now, here's
the absolute go.
Nobody knows about this. This is the unsexy grandpa's New Balance credit card. I love this card.
I love this card more than anything I've ever loved in my entire life because you get net 60 terms
with it. Net 60 terms plus 1.5% statement credit, which is like 1.5% back basically. Unlimited,
unlimited 1.5% back.
Now, how does this play together? Some of you guys, like I said, you're thinking about this. Ooh,
hold on. If I get net 40, net 45 here, and then I use this tool to stack net 60 on it, we're at net 105.
Pretty gangster. It is pretty gangster. It's actually amazing.
This is what allows you to scale at limits that other people can really only dream of, which let's
break down the billing cycle from like the pros and cons. Bros, insane payback period to scale.

Crazy on Meta and our LTV, 105 days, like I said.
The rewards bring down the service cost. Like I said, at 1.5%, and let's say you get the high end,
the 2.9%, you're basically paying 1.4%. You're basically paying 1.4% to get 105-day net terms
because it's what it's going to shake out to. You're paying 1.4%, which would make this the
cheapest loan ever at 4% APY.
Absolutely insane. This also, I talked about this from LTV perspective. I have an entire other
video that talks about this.
We're probably going to get more detail on it, but this allows you to go extremely negative in your
first time acquisition on advertising because you don't have to actually pay this. It doesn't come
out of your bank account for 105 days, 104 if we want to have that one-day buffer, but that means
that I can go negative on acquisition. I can be negative on the first rebill.
I can be negative on the second rebill, and then on that third rebill on that three-month
conversion, I am now positive, and now I am paying my bill. It's insane. Now, there are some big
cons.
First one is that you have to be really educated and understand how your cash flow and your LTD
cohorts work because like it's debt. I said at the beginning of this video, I used to think debt is a
bad thing. Debt is only a bad thing if you do not accurately use it and you do not understand your
conversion cycles.
Additionally, you're paying. I can't lie about this. You are paying.
You are paying roughly like I said, 1.4%, but you're paying time for points. You're paying 1.4% for
105 days. That's the best deal.
I'll take that all day long. Every day, I'll take that. That is the pros and cons, and this is the
ultimate guide.
I'd say the biggest thing here is definitely this. This is where I see people running the most
problems is keeping track of the company cash flow and LTD cohorts to make sure if you're going
negative on your acquisition, are you 100% confident that by the time you have to pay that bill,
the cash will be in the business? I have a lot about this. Message me on Discord.
If you have any questions, I'm more than happy to break out time and energy out of my day to
help you with this. It doesn't take a lot of time and energy from me, and my job is to help people,
so take advantage of that. And then that is the whole system.
If you have any questions on this, shoot me a message. More than happy to break this out
separately around credit cards. There's some other credit cards I didn't list in here, which are so
unbelievably goaded, I don't want to just publicly release them, so you have to message me so I

can give them to you because I cannot even speak on how unbelievably powerful they are, but
the more people that get on them, the more they're going to be taken advantage of.
So if you have any questions, shoot me a message. More than happy to help you, and I hope this
brought some value into your day. Thanks.



======================================================================
FILE: Module 1 Contribution Margin - Evolve Finance Evolve.txt
======================================================================

Module 1 Contribution Margin - Evolve Finance Evolve
Welcome to part one, contribution margin. Now, if you feel like you have a really good
understanding of contribution margin, you might be able just to skip this video. But even if you do
feel like you have a good understanding, you might learn something new.
So what is contribution margin? Now, as we go through this series, I'm going to be using a couple
of terms like LTV, contribution margin, CAC. Most of these we should know, but contribution
margin, I feel like it's confusing for a couple reasons. Now, when we talk about contribution
margin, it is revenue minus variable costs equals contribution margin.
Profit and contribution margin are not the same thing. Profit is after the entire business, all the
bills get paid. Profit or operating income is after every bill gets paid.
Now, contribution margin is stuff related to variable expenses. Specifically, as the revenue
number goes up, there is a variable cost associated with this. Now, the most common variable
cost is COGS, cost of goods sold, right? That is the product cost itself.
Now, I feel like when I'm saying cost of goods sold, you know, that means all the way delivered to
the customer. That includes the shipping, that's everything. That's just not your raw material cost.
It is the actual cost of good to the customer, right? Additionally, ad spend. Ad spend is a variable
cost. When we think about advertising costs, it usually goes up or it goes down.
It's variable, increases, decreases. These are the core two. There's three or four more that I'm
gonna go through in a second that make a big difference that not a lot of people think about.
And it's the difference if you're doing a million dollars a month, it's a difference of 10, 20, $30,000
at times. So first one, COGS, makes sense. We can all wrap our brain around that.
Ad spend, makes sense. We can all wrap our brain around that. Next is the processing fees and
sub-X fees.
Processing fees, I feel like is easy for people to get. If you're on Shopify, it's usually about 2.8
plus 30 cents unless you're on Shopify Plus, which can go as all the way as low as 2.4. But it is a
fix. It is a variable cost on every transaction.
So that's easy to round that to around 3% just because if you have more American Express cars
or whatever, it might go up a little bit. But that is the first variable cost. The second one is the subX fees.
So if you're using platforms like Seals, Keo, Loop Subscription, there's usually is a variable cost
attached to that as well. Usually it's between half a percent and one percent, but that's a massive
difference. At a million dollars, it's $10,000 a month.

That's entire team members' salaries, review editor, et cetera. It adds up very quickly, and not a
lot of people think about adding that into their COGS or variable costs. Now, the advanced piece
is the team costs, and we'll get into this later.
But it's also the team costs are variable. For instance, if you have team members that are tied to
ad spend, agencies that are tied to ad spend, whatever, that is a variable cost in the business
that increases and decreases. You have a team member or an agency that gets 5% ad spend.
You spend a million dollars, that's $50,000. You spend $100,000, it's $5,000, right? So you can
see how that increases and decreases based on the up and down of the business, which should
actually be counted in your contribution margin for the first order. We're going to get into this
because as we talked about LTV, the first order and all subsequent orders have different costs
associated.
This is a great example, and we'll get into this as we go through the sheet that's attached. You're
going to get an awesome template out of this. But when a business is running and we have
advertising costs associated, that advertising cost is only associated with the first order, not just
from the cost to acquire the customer, aka CAC, but also the agency team member fees,
whatever, that 3% to 5% was only applicable to that first order, which means the subsequent
COGS will be better, which I'll talk about in a second.
This is where we get the saying, it's okay to lose $20 of contribution margin, aka go to negative
$20 if in three months we make $30 or any profit, really, where it's okay to lose money as long as
we're making a profit after all the bills are paid after a certain time period, usually three months. I'll
get into why I picked that period pretty quickly. First section, again, very basic going through the
contribution margin component, but very, very straightforward.
Let me know again at any point if you have any questions, feel free to drop me a message. Let's
go on to the next part of this.



======================================================================
FILE: Module 2 LTV Modeling How to Outspend Everyone - Evolve Finance.txt
======================================================================

Module 2 LTV Modeling How to Outspend Everyone - Evolve
Finance
Welcome to part two. All right, now we're going to actually get into some of the juicy stuff. Here's
the real sauce, guys.
So what is the purpose of LTV? And when we really define it, the purpose in our context of
utilizing LTV is how can I outspend everyone else, everyone else in the marketplace while still
making a profit? My goal, your goal is to spend as much as humanly possible while generating
contribution margin and a end profit for the business. Now, remember, we talked about the
difference between contribution margin and profit. We'll get more into that in a little bit.
But our goal is to spend as much as humanly possible while creating a profit with healthy
margins. Which we'll get into the definition of health in a second. Now, we've got an awesome
little spreadsheet here.
It'll be linked below in the module, so you can click it here. And this is going to be the template
that we're going to be utilizing for the rest of this entire module. However, before we get into that,
I got to make a couple of things very clear.
Where do we pull this data? Pull it all from Shopify. Very, very simple. Shopify data specifically.
So we're going to use the term CAC here. When I use the term customer acquisition cost, there is
a difference between CAC and CPA. We are looking at any time period.
If I spend a million dollars and I acquire a million customers, then my CAC is one. And when
we're saying acquiring customers, I'm specifically talking about net new customers into a
business. I'm not talking about returning customers.
I'm talking specifically Shopify, filter, new or returning customer, new customer equals true. And
that is what I'm referring, and then divided by total dollars spent in that same time period to
understand our true CAC. Now, I'm not going to pull that from Facebook.
We're going to pull directly from Shopify using ad spend data from Meta, but using this as an
example. Now, the next thing is I feel like people get very, very confused when I say LTV versus
retention. These are not the same thing.
So when we pull LTV data, I recommend using a tool called Lifetimely. You can do this manually
with Triple Whale. It's just not nearly as accurate.
I love Lifetimely. It's super cheap and easy to work with, but if you have a better solution, feel free
to use it as long as we get the correct data. There is a difference between dollars and customers.
That is why using LTV is so, so important here, because the value that a customer may provide

to me, the value that a customer may provide me is usually very different than the actual amount
of customers. So when we think about subscription businesses, the big thing up front is that there
is usually an upsell in their initial purchase, right? Some kind of post-purchase upsell to boost
average order value. That is not usually included in subsequent orders.
Or you may have separate margins in the first and the return order. We'll get into the margins in a
second. But when we're talking about this, I do not want to look at the customers.
I want to look at the dollars, the lifetime value, the value that a customer provides to us. So let's
look at this in this little sheet here. So I'm going to make myself a little smaller just so as we go
through this, I can explain how this sheet is actually utilized and it'll make a little bit of sense here.
So when we look at LTV, what are we trying to accomplish here? What is our goal? So let's break
down the function of the spreadsheet. First one here, host this month cohort retention, AKA LTV.
Month zero is 100.
I want you to think about this. And most businesses will actually have this at 101. Month zero is
the time in which the customer's transaction is completed.
And that month is finished, right? That is month zero. Now, usually you'll actually do this about
101, 102%. And people will say, well, why? That's usually because some customers will come
back and buy again in less than a 28 day period or less than a month period, it's usually around
one or 2% of customers, I don't know why, but that's just the data.
And that's what the math usually shows. So our LTV here is broken from a dollar or a percentage
of growth. So if we think about this as a dollar amount, which we're going to come to in a second.
If we had $1 in month zero, then month one, which we have here with our dummy data at 60%
would be zero to one or zero to 60%, which means we can make an extra 60 cents, 60.8 cents in
this scenario, month two, 38 would be 38 cents and onward and onward. We use a hundred
dollars. It would be $60 and 80 cents, $38 and 10 cents, 26.
This is the LTV that you'll normally see for a business. You'll see the big drop off in these first
three months. Usually a healthy business will have over 100% LTV in month one, two, and three.
We can see that this one has a dummy test data is 125 and you can kind of see that it degrades
from there. But that's the function of our first column here, which is the post this month cohort
retention. Next one is revenue.
Now this is also very straightforward. This is the revenue multiplier from here. If we have a month,
zero value of 100% multiplied by our orange cells down here, which can get the orange cells in a
second multiplied by orange cell of AOV really straightforward AOV 64 multiplied by 100% got it
makes total sense, easy, next one here, next one here.

Um, revenue you can see in the next month is 38 91 because it's taking our percentage here of
60 multiplying by the AOV getting 38.91. Next is margin. Um, margin. Remember we talked about
contribution margin.
This is the variable cost of the business. All right. This is the variable cost of the business.
So our CAC, our cost to acquire a customer, right? It's our revenue. B3 multiplied by a margin to
give us a dollar of margin amount minus our CAC cost 74 multiplied by our total customers. And
in this example, we're just going to use one, but I'll give more examples as we get down the
levers here.
Great. Um, total revenue from this cohort. This is how much we've collected from this cohort.
And if you hear me use the word cohort, that just means a group of customers that have
anything, uh, anything similar to each other. And in this sense, it is customers acquired in any
given month, month zero for this demonstration, we'll just use it as the current month, when,
which is February utilize this as February for this cohort acquisition month. So in February, this
cost, this cohort paid a $64.
And then next month, which would be March. We got 101, 102 total. Um, even though this is the
cohort acquisition from February and so on and so on.
Last one here is total margin. So this is what's important. This is what tells us when we can and
can't scale where we can see we went negative $23 on this customer in month zero.
Then we went positive six 68, because this takes our total margin, uh, plus the month previous.
So we're adding in $30 of margin minus the 23 we lost in month zero and then onward and
onward and onward. So we can use this as a tool to see 12 months out.
How was the business doing in general? Great. Now let's talk about all of these orange cells. So
by and large, if the cell is orange, you can change it.
If the cell is gray, it is a value or a formula that should not be changed. So AOV really
straightforward. What is our average order value? You can see, I have this broken up for first and
second order, which I'll explain in a second.
Um, CAC, what does it cost for us to acquire a customer? Total customers, you can see different
scenarios. For instance, if I'm trying to acquire a hundred thousand customers, or if I'm trying to
acquire, um, you know, a million, right? So for instance, if I could say, Hey, this month I'm going
to acquire a hundred customers. Bam.
You can see that while acquiring a hundred customers will change all of our data up here. As
we're going through this, we're going to leave this around the one number just so we can use it,
um, for breaking this up because it'd be really easy to make sense. Uh, next, as we go through

here is the cost of goods.
Now, again, we talked about cost of goods earlier. Think about the cost of goods as the cost of
the product, less the processing fee. We don't have to do OpEx here because we'll explain that in
a second, but the cost of the product plus the processing fee, um, and then AOV second order
and margin second order.
Now, why do I have this broken up? So your margin is going to be different depending on the
order. I've made this clear. Great example is if we have, uh, if we have intro offers, for instance,
maybe customers get a bunch of cool free shit in their first order, and then after that, they don't
get it.
Margin is going to be better on subsequent orders. Great example is like razor blade companies,
razor blade companies usually send you the, the razor and the blade and your first order. And
then all subsequent orders have a different both AOV and then margin on that.
So that's what we would utilize these two functions as, um, check your subscription order. And
then again, as I said, there's going to be one click upsells that may be in the first order, but will
not be in subsequent orders, which will definitely affect your AOV and your margin. Last thing
here is OpEx.
So OpEx as a function of cost of goods. So I give this example here. If you have a hundred
thousand dollars of OpEx and you plan on doing 10 million dollars of revenue that, and you have
a $64 AOV, which is linked over to our AOV over here, um, we know how many transactions
that's going to be.
Cause all we're doing is we're taking our top line revenue and dividing it by our transactions.
Again, this is the orange cell. So you put in the estimated amount of transactions you expect that
month.
Um, and then what your OpEx is, and then we'll say, oh, well, this is how many transactions we're
going to have. Right. Which also will tell us that, well, if we have a hundred thousand, uh, we
have a hundred thousand transactions, or excuse me, we have 156,000 transactions and we
have a hundred thousand, uh, dollars of OpEx, then that means our OpEx per transactions is
going to be 64 cents or as a function of cost of goods, it's going to be 1%.
Perfect. 64 versus 64. Funny how that, funny how that math works out, but it helps us understand
what this CAC is going to look like because our OpEx or COGS is 20%, but our, uh, COGS plus
OpEx is 21.6. Now, in general, I have a non-complicated version and a complicated version of
this to include OpEx.
Um, you really shouldn't need to worry about OpEx quite yet. Uh, but it helps when we get to
different levels of scale, understand how much we can acquire, how much we can pay to acquire

a new customer versus how much gets absorbed by LTV, because this will be a big function of
this. Now, uh, next video, we're going to cover the wins and the losses and the easy successes
are the ones that make this a lot harder, um, in our next video.
So if you have any questions on any of this module or this model or anything on this, let me
know, but this next video is going to co is going to cover how the barometers of success really
define us.



======================================================================
FILE: Module 3 The Barometers Fix Fast vs Kill You - Evolve Finance Ev.txt
======================================================================

Module 3 The Barometers Fix Fast vs Kill You - Evolve Finance Ev
All right, welcome back. Now, if you didn't already do this, I need you to go back to that last video
and grab the template, or it should be right below this one as well. And I want you to fill it out with
your actual data.
So pause this video and go do that right now. Okay, I'm assuming you did it. And if you didn't,
then that's too bad.
I'm gonna go through this anyway. So in life, and especially in e-commerce, there are things we
can fix and there are things we cannot fix, absolutely cannot fix under any circumstance. Now,
some of these things can be fixed very easily.
Some of them can be hard, but what's important here is to talk about what is the easy to hard
ratio and what thing we should tackle. So we're gonna go back to our module here and I'm going
to make myself small as I go through this, because it's gonna get a little complicated here in a
second. But what I really wanna talk about is the things that can be fixed and can't be fixed.
I'm gonna show you the ideal business. This would be like the perfect business right here. So this
is what the numbers look for this business.
A $64 AOV and $74 CAC. Let's talk about what's achievable and what's real. That means you're
running at a 0.86 in your ad account.
You can do that all day. You can run a 0.86 all day. And we're gonna see how hard you can
actually push this in a second.
So first thing is the CAC to AOV ratio. You are losing, like you're running at an inefficient ad
spend. This is why you can beat all these other people who need to be first order profitable,
which we're gonna come to in a second.
So first thing here, this looks decent, $74, $64 AOV, $74 CAC. Now, if you came to me and said,
well, mine's way worse. You're gonna come to me and say, well, mine's way worse.
I'm like, well, what is it like? And you say, well, I'm at like a $100 CAC and a $64 AOV, so I'm
gonna like a 0.6 in my ad account. And I'd say, okay, that still works. Still works totally fine,
actually.
Works great. Look at this. We're still making money.
By month three, we're making $12.95 of profits. By month six, we're gonna go a little further here.
By month six, we're rocking at $35.53. Month 12, aka one year LTV, we are making $62.19. I'd
say, great, what's your problem? This still works.

Still totally works. And it's easily fixable. I think realistically, when I talk with most brands this
would work in stereo, I say try to keep yourself at a 0.7 or higher.
This is for a lot of reasons, but we're gonna talk about this in a second. So let's put ourselves to
what I say makes the most sense. Let's put ourselves at a 0.8 here and give another scenario
here.
Grayson, my LTV sucks. Let's give another scenario for LTV. Let's say my month one, so I have
60.
Let's cut it all out. Let's go 30. We'll go down to, we'll go, actually, let's just do all this.
What I'm gonna do is I'm just gonna cut this as a function. Cut all of this bad boy in half. I'm
gonna use my GigaChad brain right quick.
Let's cut all this bad stuff in half and see what it looks like. You came to me and said, Grayson, I
can't fix this. My LTV is awful.
I'd say, well, not really. Still making money by month three. This would be a big indicator to me of
a couple things.
Back on the creative side, my CAC is too high. I'd say fix your creative. You're running a 0.5, 0.6.
You need a better landing page.
You need better creative. There is a problem with this system. Very easily fixable.
There's not really a world where you can get yourself to a 0.75 and still win. There's not really that
well. Same thing with this.
If we have 30% month zero to month one LTV, you've got an opt-in problem. Your take rate on
your subscription is not high enough. Your incentivization is not good enough to make someone
take the subscription or you have an extremely high month zero term.
I don't think that's the cause, but this would be an example of what I would probably do. I'd say,
well, let's go to our data. Let's look at our subscription take rate and say, well, maybe we need to
make the price bigger, the bigger difference in price.
Bump up your one-time price by 10, 20%. Sure, your CAC might go up a couple dollars, but let
me show you the difference here. Let's pretend we're back here.
We're at an $80 CAC, right? And we are currently at $1.56 with our current take rate. And I say,
well, hey, Grayson, my CAC is gonna go up by 10 whole freaking dollars if you want me to get to
this LTV. And I say, well, let's do it.
What happens when we go up? Goes up by $10, I'm still making $22 a profit by month three

versus, oops, versus the previous here where at the 30, let's even grab this data. Hold on, let's
grab this. Grab this data here and I'm making $1.56. That doesn't work.
It's better to be in this scenario than anything else because sure, my CAC jumps by $10, but now
I'm still making $22.95. I'm at a .7, I'm still making more profit. So that's in the case of the LTV
itself. And I can get really specific on this, but in the case of the LTV itself, it is more important for
you to maintain the highest take rate in LTV as possible even if the customer acquisition cost
increases, okay? All right, let's keep moving on here.
Grayson, another scenario. It's gonna be in this scenario. My CAGs suck, right? Let's get the
other scenarios.
My CAGs are not good. So my CAGs are like 35%. 35% CAGs, ouch.
So with CAGs, I'll fix it like 36. Here's the beautiful thing about this. At an $80 CAC, I'm still
making money by month three.
Still making money by month three. Your CAGs suck. I would just tell you, you need to fix this.
Get to sub 30%. I'd say 30% is really the max you should be a customer at cost of goods period.
Easiest way of fixing that, raise your prices.
Your prices are too low. If you have a great manufacturer and you're confident you have good
CAGs compared to the rest of the sphere, then raise your prices. Otherwise, you don't have good
CAGs and your manufacturer is shafting you, so work with us to get you better CAGs.
That's what I'd say. Go to a different manufacturer, negotiate, bring it down, whatever. In general
here, your CAGs are not good.
So that's what I'd probably say, but even then, you're still making money in three months. All right,
still making money. So you still have a significant amount of contribution margin.
You're actually making money a month through here, even with 35% cost of goods, but the cost
of goods is easy to fix. These are the things that are easy to fix because we can just negotiate,
get better terms, make it work better for us. All right, let me give you the ones that are difficult to
fix.
These are the ones that are really, really difficult, okay? Low AOV, give you guys this example. I
got this question a lot. Low AOV isn't very, very, very difficult to fix.
I hear like the $19.99 month. I hear this club often, and they're like, Grayson, at that, I'm running
at 20% COGs. I got 79% margin.
The problem is is your CAG is going to be very, very difficult. You're not gonna be able to get,
even if I get like a $40 CAG here, right? Even if I get a $40 CAG, let's go down to 30. 30, I start

making money, but it's just not realistic.
It's not realistic for you to be able to have that level of customer acquisition cost because to a
certain degree on meta, your CPMs will only be a certain length no matter what. Even if you have
the best ads in the world, your CTR will never be above a certain amount. Best landing pages,
you have the best fricking, your cost per click will never be above or below, excuse me, a certain
bar and whisker, which is impossible to beat.
Same thing with the landing page. You're never really gonna get, even if you have like a 10%
conversion rate, it doesn't matter because there's not gonna be enough meat left on the bone to
be successful here. It just doesn't make sense.
So AOV is very, very difficult to win at a low AOV. The minimum, the absolute minimum that I
argue everyone to do is a minimum of a 29, a absolute minimum for any kind of subscription,
unless it's a micro subscription, which I'll get to in a second. But in general, I'd say 29.99 is like
the go-to, but realistically like 39, 49, 39 is like, I would never personally run any brand under $39
of subscription unless the margins were insane or it was a very specific micro subscription offer.
Now you can see I drew lines at the month three, I drew lines at the month six, month 12 for a
couple of reasons here. Now, the reason why I did that is those are our cashflow conversion
cycles. And we're gonna cover that really hardcore in the next video.
But essentially, as you're looking at your business, you can pay to acquire a customer. Now you
run into scaling issues. Let me give you an example.
Grayson, if I'm making money by month three, can't I scale as much as I want? And they say, oh,
yeah, kinda. What's the example when you can't? Well, you wanna acquire 100,000 customers,
do you have $1.7 million to do it? Most people do not, right? Most people do not have $1.7 million
to scale that quickly. But our next video, I'm gonna show you how you can and never run out of
money while you're doing it.



======================================================================
FILE: Module 4 The Cash Conversion Cycle - Evolve Finance Evolve.txt
======================================================================

Module 4 The Cash Conversion Cycle - Evolve Finance Evolve
Okay, so this is the best part. This is probably my favorite and the best part and probably the
most valuable part of this entire series that will allow you to go from zero, a hundred thousand, to
tens of millions of dollars in revenue in the shortest amount of time possible, without having to put
out your own capital. So I learned a lot about this over the last several years because I started
investing in my own e-commerce companies and I realized how expensive it is to go negative
quickly.
So I'm going to show you the advanced cash flow conversion cycle that allows you to scale
rapidly quickly. So let's go back to our model and let's talk about a couple of things here. I'm
going to make myself small for a second.
So in the last call, I talked about these negative, these cash conversion cycles, and I talked about
like my one customer example. Let's give you a business. Let's get a business here.
Let's say we've got this RLTV. Let's say we have like a $50 CAC. Let's make it $60.
Actually, yeah, $50 is fine. $50 is fine. That looks solid.
Okay, cool. So we're losing money here until month three, month zero, month one, month two,
month three, right? We're losing money. Now, if I came to you and I gave that example earlier
and I said, hey, I want to acquire a hundred thousand customers.
Oh, I'd say, great. You got $2.7 million lying around to do it. And I'd say most people don't, right?
Unless you came from royalty.
Most people do not have $2.7 million, especially in a business they just started up laying around
to lose. And you say, well, I'm going to make money. I'm going to make it by month three.
I'm going to be profitable by month three, but there's a lot of death. I call this the great wall of
death here. Let's give us a better example here.
Let me give a better, let's say we're like a $40 keg, maybe $35, whatever. Here we go, $35 keg.
And you can see that we're profitable here, $183,000 profitable after month zero.
Now here's the easiest solution. This is what a lot of people do, is they use a Facebook credit
line. Line of credit, we'll call this the Facebook credit line.
Green. Oh my gosh, I'm clicking myself, that's why. Green, Facebook credit line.
So we're good here. And we actually pay out of our bank account here when we are $183,000
profitable. This is when we pay.
We pay here. Facebook credit line, which is net 30, but it's actually net 45 because they give you

15 days to pay it right here. We are paying here.
So we didn't even put out $1.2 million. We didn't put anything out. If it's on the Facebook credit
line, yes, this is a liability on the business.
But as long as we are confident in our LTD and our ability to fulfill orders, we're positive
$183,000. We have $2.9 million in revenue, right? We have $2.9 million in revenue. I made a
quick adjustment to this, but we're positive $2.9 million in revenue month zero.
Month one, we're at 4.6. Month two, we're at 5.7. And we are positive $183,000 in profit. You just
generated $5 million in revenue, really 2.9 in month one without losing a single dollar. It's insane.
Now, this is where it gets really, really complicated, where it gets incredibly intense for a lot of
people. And I feel like it's difficult to wrap your mind around. It's really difficult to wrap your mind
around.
So let's look at this. So when we look at the total revenue at 4.6, the total margin at 1.83, or
$183,000, I get asked the question, it's like, well, great, but what if I'm in this scenario? Why,
Grayson, why do you use the three-month code word? Why do you use that one? Well, let's look
at it. Let me go back to our little Nero board.
Our workflow, Net45 with Meta, Melio, Plastic, Melio, my two favorite words in the whole world.
The problem with most invoices is that you can't pay them with a credit card. So somebody made
an entire business model allowing you to pay invoices with credit cards.
Melio, Plastic, those are those two business models. Bill.com, pay your invoice with a credit card.
Now, why is this important? Because most people are like, okay, great, I'll throw this on my Amex
Platinum right here.
Great. We got another 30 days out of it. Now we're here, baby.
Still negative. Not working. Got points, right? This is what I think is really important when you
think about the points to the fee.
Usually it's between 2% to 3%. You have to pay a fee for it. But if your points slash cashback is
between 2% to 3%, it doesn't matter.
It's like it zeroes out. There's a term that the least sexy things in life are the most profitable. I use
this term all the time.
I really think this about credit cards. There's two credit cards. I'm not going to talk about one of
them.
It's the sauce credit card with the most insane rewards and returns you've ever seen. And nobody

knows about it. Send me a DM if you want it.
And then the other thing is the Amex Plum Card. Amex Plum Card. 60 day terms.
What? What? 60 day terms. Okay. It's not platinum.
It's not shiny. It's not sexy. It's your grandpa's card.
60 day terms. Where does that get us now? It gets us from negative to profitable. It takes us all
the way from month zero year to month three.
105 days later. Positive $157,000. Not a single dollar left your bank account.
Now, arguments to be made because you do have to pay your cost of goods. So if we use this
month zero as an example and say we have paying 2% cost of goods, we'll still add a $580,000
cost of goods bill. Not discrediting that.
That's something that does exist. But you can utilize that same Nelio Amex Plum Card to pay
your manufacturer with net 60 terms. And if you can just negotiate net 30 with your manufacturer,
you're set right here.
You're the same time frame. But all of your costs to acquire this customer, this CAC, right there,
right here, right here. By the time the money actually leaves your account, you're positive.
You didn't lose anything. You are first order profitable because the time you pay for it, it's right
here. You are first order profitable in a manner of speaking, of course, in a manner of speaking,
you're first order profitable because you're able to achieve this very, very quickly.
You're able to achieve this very, very quickly. You can go to any business. Once you become an
e-com veteran, which some of the people watching this might be, once you become an e-com
veteran, you can go open up a good credit card, use Nelio, get your terms with MetaCrate.
And then all of a sudden you can scale because this could be your business. If you had the right
creative, if you have the right infrastructure set up and you are out of $50 CAC and you know
your LTV, man, you can go from non-existence to $3 million in MRR in 30 days. Just like that.
So this is why I think it's very important that we understand how this works. And I'm going to be
wrapping this up in a second because this is the most important part of it. But everything we just
went over today, it revolves around one thing, and that's your math.
Making sure your numbers are correct. Making sure you know what you're doing. The hard thing
about this business is that lots of people can come and look at your math and say, oh, this is
what I think it is.
But you as the operator have to know this hardcore. And I'll show the example here. If you are off

by 5% in your month zero cohort, this now drops from $60,000 to $55,000.
This now drops from $38,000 to roughly $32,000. This drops from $26,000 to $20,000. And you
just went from a positive of $158,000 to a negative of $257,000 by being 5% off.
You have to know your numbers really, really, really well. I suggest until you get really dialed into
this, shoot for month two. You got 30 days of wiggle room here.
The nice thing about this is that when we look at the six months out and we look at the one year
out, it's pretty much impossible to lose even with that lower ratio. We'll show you this. Even with
that lower ratio, just moved our profitability out by a month.
Still profitable at month six by a lot. And then almost a million dollars in profit by month 12 here.
So really, really important that we look at our numbers and we know what we're doing.
Because little mistakes add up. 1% of a million dollars is $10,000. 10% is $100,000.
In this example, you're off by, like I said, 5% here. $2.9 million in revenue is $145,000. So don't
make those mistakes.
And if you need any help, drop me a message. It takes me no time at all to look over your
numbers, make sure you're in the right spot, and make sure you didn't do something wrong or
dumb. So let me know if you guys enjoyed this module.
Really appreciate it. I'm going to be making a lot more and more than happy to help anyone who
needs it. Shoot me a message.
Again, will take me no time at all. And I'm always open to making time for whoever needs it. Even
if you're a little baby company, huge one, my job is to be of service to you.



======================================================================
FILE: Payment Term Negotiating Strategies - Evolve Supply Chain Progra.txt
======================================================================

Payment Term Negotiating Strategies - Evolve Supply Chain Progra
All right, guys, so we are going to do this module on payment term negotiating strategies. So
there's a lot of different ways for you to negotiate payment terms. So we're going to be diving in to
some different topics to kind of help all of you figure out some really good tactics in negotiating
payment terms with your supplier.
So let's start with the overview and I'll let CJ kind of give a rundown on what we're going to cover
today. Yeah, so first, we're just going to high level talk about why payment terms matter, what it
can do to help your business and why you should treat them seriously. Then we're going to go
into key negotiation foundations.
This will talk about just some things that you need to get set up and prepared for when you're
going into negotiating. Creative payment term models, just different ways and different things you
can discuss with your suppliers about things that can help ease your cash flow and give you
some interesting payment terms. The power of in-person negotiation, just going over what you
should be prepared for if you do go for an in-person visit with your supplier for the most success.
Leveraging group buying power, we're just going to talk about kind of what group buying means
and different resources you can utilize to get better deals. IncoTerms and effective payment
terms, this is going to just give you a general idea of different steps in the way of ordering
processes that just general knowledge of things you should know when you're going in to talk
about payment terms. Using tariffs and policy shifts as leverage, this will talk about just different
political landscapes and things that you can kind of bring to the table that could be advantageous
for you.
And then finally, key takeaways from the entire presentation. All right, a lot of good stuff. I'm
ready to rock and roll.
Yeah, so why payment terms matter. So just to start off, like I'm sure a lot of people that are
watching this know what payment terms are, but payment terms are the agreed upon conditions
that specify when and how a buyer pays a seller for their goods and services. And these terms
can vary really greatly.
It could mean upfront deposit requirements for a production run, or it could be the difference in
paying 30, 60 days or more after shipment of the goods. It's an extremely important concept,
because if you're able to extend your payment due dates for your production runs, that means
you can free up your company's capital to invest in marketing or other effects. Yeah, so cash
cash flow is something that challenges all scaling brands.
You know, the more you scale, the more money you start to spend, and then the more you spend
money once you really find those those ads or funnels that hit and you start investing into them,
you know, the more you want to be able to spend into it without investing so much in product up

front. Right. So payment terms matter because it directly affects your cash flow.
The more cash you have, the more ads you can run and the harder you can scale. So you don't
want to have too much cash tied up in product all the time. And it's extremely important, too,
because like when someone's, you know, when a brand owner is optimizing their ads, it is
incredibly counterproductive that they have to press the pause button.
It means they're going to have to completely start over and reoptimize. And that could be, again,
the difference between having a really profitable season or or not. Right.
Yeah. All right. Yes.
So. OK, so getting into Inco Inco terms and why they matter, so Inco terms, it's it's useful to think
about Inco terms because they're establishing the conditions that your payment is being made to
the manufacturer. So it's like they that is what dictates the clock start date on your payment terms
with your manufacturer.
So, for example, here we've listed out what some of the some of the most common payment
terms that you'll see when you're working with a manufacturer. The first is X works. So this is like
the cost of the goods on the factory floor.
Right. So this is you picking up the goods from the factory and you are responsible for the
shipping. The second is FOB or freight on board.
So this is where the goods are delivered by your manufacturer to the port. And so then the buyer
is responsible for the shipping and the customs from there. And then third, delivery duty paid.
This is where the seller will give you a price that includes the shipping duties and tariff. It's
essentially your landed and delivered cost in the domestic market. And then finally, net terms.
When you're thinking about net terms, that's like when when does your payment clock start? So
in the case of X works, it's when the goods are leave the factory floor. Right. In the case of freight
on board, it's when the goods are already delivered to the port and then delivery duty paid.
If you had net terms on GDP on a GDP arrangement, then you your clock would start after the
goods are actually delivered. Yeah. And like a couple of points to be made on Inco terms,
because I know like everyone has like a different set up.
But FOB is commonly used like if you're actually like booking like containers and doing more like
standardized bulk shipping. And it's more beneficial to be using the factory for FOB because
they're probably going to get better trucking prices to the port versus you trying to organize like a
shipping company to pick it up at the factory and then bring it to the port. There's also some
export clearance that ends up happening because of that.

If you don't do FOB and you're doing X works and it does, it does cost a little bit more minimal,
but maybe it'll be like a couple hundred dollars difference. But FOB at the same time is better
than X works if you're doing containers because you're mitigating some risk with that shipment to
the port. The factory ends up becoming responsible for loading the container, bringing it to the
port, and then like their duty has been complete.
So like once it gets to the port. So that's kind of like the real purpose of FOB. You'll sometimes
get more favorable pricing if you do FOB over X works.
And part of that has to do with part of that part of that has to do with like the VAT refund that the
factory is getting. So, you know, I just wanted to kind of like clarify some of the like the FOB Inco
terms with you. And then DDP most of the time is a separate shipping service.
So like it means like delivery is duty paid and it's you know, you're utilizing like a shipping
company that's essentially doing everything end to end, including handling like the customs
clearance and like delivery to the to the end warehouse. They are. And they're also the importer
on record.
Like it's kind of like you're just given like a tracking number and then you'll and then like it'll like
eventually show up type of thing. But a lot of people in this community are probably utilizing that
shipping method because they're typically guys are doing more lightweight products. So it's you
know, it's more cost effective to ship DDP versus shipping like standard containers and dealing
with like the customs clearance and tariff stuff.
So I just wanted to kind of like give some like offer some like clarity on my Inco term stuff. Yeah,
for most people that are going to be shipping or fulfilling from China, it's going to be an exports
set up where your fulfillment company will contact the factory and send a truck to pick it up or the
factory will arrange for a delivery to wherever your fulfillment center is. If you're doing a hybrid
model and you have things that are fulfilling from China and then you're also doing international
shipments, most likely always going to be an export set up as well.
And there might be different payment terms that your supplier will try to negotiate based on where
the stock is going. If you're if you're going to be fulfilling from China, that means you're going to
have access to the stock immediately for sale. And so then your supplier might want to get the
balance payment or some of the balance payment for those goods that are being sent to a
fulfillment warehouse in China earlier than they would if you're if you say you're doing like a
container that's going to be on the water for a month that you won't have access to be able to sell
with for 30 days or more.
OK. All right. So, yeah, so like I think that was just like a good way to kind of just like introduce
some of the terms and how how they how they impact payment terms in the sense that like the
clock is going to start differently based on those terms.

So I think we can carry on to the key negotiation foundation so that we can get more of some
more insight. I'll let you take the floor on this one, CJ. Yeah, so there's a few things that we
wanted to talk about to keep in mind when you're getting ready to start negotiating with the
supplier.
You know, first of all, you're going to want to establish credibility with them if you're if you're, you
know, say you're a successful brand and you've been running some really high numbers, but
you're now working with a new supplier because you're developing a new product or they're they
just have a better offering or whatever it is, the chances of them giving you good payment terms
right off the bat, just because you've ran a successful business or have a successful brand are
going to be pretty low. So it's important to have some sort of credibility, some sort of ordering
history, some sort of relationship with them before you even just go and start asking for payment
terms. Otherwise, they're going to not really know how to react and it might kind of set the
relationship off on the wrong foot.
Right. And so that kind of leads us right into the second point here where you want to
demonstrate your business strength. And so these these go hand in hand after you're after you've
established your credibility and then you can go in and show the supplier a robust forecast and
say, hey, here's what we've done, you know, the past six months or the past year or whatever the
time period is.
Here's what we plan to do if the terms stay where they are now. Like, let's say you have no terms,
you're still doing like 30 percent deposit, 70 percent upon completion of goods. You could say,
like, you know, here's where we're at now and what I think I could do if the terms stay the same.
But if you were to give me net 30, here's what the financials and the forecast looks like. And just
kind of show them those options and try to paint a picture for them of like what you're actually
trying to do. And then that goes a long way into our third point here where you're highlighting the
long term partnership.
Right. And so if you're able to go to them with a vision and with a plan so that, you know, you're
not just relying on them to think of the solution, it shows that you really are trying to commit to a
long term relationship with them. And it'll give them a lot more trust to give you better payment
terms.
Yeah, I think that that's really useful to remember. Like, I really like point three here talking about
the long term partnership. A lot of times, like when you're thinking about the interactions with a
manufacturer, when you start working with them, they don't necessarily know how long you're
going to be a prospective customer.
Right. And for these manufacturers, like it's by sharing, you know, by sharing your forward looking
forecast and by, you know, establishing an order history with them, you make it so that they don't
have to operate in a short term profitability like model from their side. Right.

Because when a manufacturer, when they're trying to plan out their own profitability models, a lot
of times like for them to be really profitable. They need to be they need to keep their production
line running. They need to order their materials with some volume behind it.
Right. So that they can try to negotiate discount pricing with their subcontracted manufacturers.
So if you're sharing this long term vision with them and you're building that trust, then they're able
to operate with that longer term profitability model in mind.
They might be more willing to, you know, to invest in your success. Right. Yeah.
Something I think that goes a long way for all three of these points is trying to set up like a rolling
deposit. And to explain what that is very briefly, it's you would put down and say a deposit of 10
or 20 or 30 percent, let's say, for raw materials and then let them know what your forecast is and
say, hey, I'm going to leave this 20 or 30 percent here with you at the factory. And then every
time you ship an order, I'll pay you.
Or if it's like, you know, net 15, net 30, every time after you ship an order 15 or 30 days later, I'm
going to pay you for 100 percent of the order value and leave that deposit with you so that you're
able to constantly have labor force, raw materials. Your your forecast is in sync with what I've got
going on. And then that's just kind of putting your money where your mouth is and giving a
commitment to the supplier.
Okay. All right. Yeah.
So let's get into like creative payment term models. There's a lot of different ways of structuring
payment terms. And I think we could also just give some general examples of it as well.
For example, like, see, I'll let you kind of dive a little deeper now into like the pay as you ship
model since you were briefly talking about that. Yeah, sure. So there's there's a few different
ways to look at like pay as you ship.
Right. So you could put in let's say you're selling 10,000 units monthly. Right.
But you don't know if you're going to start to scale or not. You know, 10,000 could turn into 15,
20, maybe 30,000 units very quickly. Like if you if you start having ads that are hitting or you
figure something out.
Right. So you let's say you want to put a deposit in for 30,000 units, but you negotiate with your
supplier. Hey, I'm going to put in a deposit on 30,000 units, but I might only ship 10,000 a month.
If it starts to scale, though, I need to be able to ship, you know, 20,000 units immediately. So at
that point, the factory would have the deposit on the 30,000 units that you need to ship. They
would have the inventory for you, and then you would just let them know when you need to ship

and that's when the balance would be due unless you have some sort of net term thing worked
out with them where you could pay after you ship.
But this is a good way to ensure that you have stock. The factory is, you know, kind of coming out
of pocket on their own to keep inventory in their warehouse for you to be able to ship at the drop
of a dime. And this can really help just open up flexibility when you're looking at scaling a brand.
Yeah, it's a great point that it not only is like it's not only helpful with cash flow, but to your point
that they would have inventory, it's improving your lead times then. So you can communicate, you
know, you can have a better customer experience to communicate those quicker ship times.
Yeah, I'm sorry.
My bad, CJ. I was going to say like, with optimizing the lead times too, then you're able to get
more into like these order cycles where you're not like purchasing as much at a time. I mean, you
could set your purchases like for a long period, but then at least like you're kind of like optimizing
your cash flow a little bit more in case you need to be like, you know, more nimble with like your
with your money.
But sorry, I'll let you continue your point. Yeah, it's especially helpful if you're running multiple
SKUs because you don't know if one SKU is going to pop off all of a sudden and start selling
more than some of the others. And so if you have that backup inventory at the factory that you've
already put a deposit on, and then all of a sudden you're running low on stock of a certain SKU,
you can get replenishment of it very, very quickly.
Yeah. So why don't we, Chris, why don't we dive into the line of credit term concept? I know you
have like some experience with it. Sure.
Yeah. So line of credit terms like this is where you would establish a credit line to a certain dollar
limit. And this is great because you can you can kind of set this risk level with your manufacturer
then.
So to try it, I think it's great to kind of give an example to try to illustrate how this would work out.
So let's say you have a let's say you're working with a manufacturer and you have a five hundred.
Let's say you have five hundred thousand dollars in orders with them for product, but you have a
two hundred fifty K credit limit with net terms.
So let's say that you have net 30 terms with this credit limit. Right. So what that would mean is if
you have five hundred K in orders with this manufacturer and you have two hundred fifty K. In net
30 terms, then you only would have to pay for half of those orders up front.
And then you can float the balance according to those net 30 terms, you know, the remaining two
hundred fifty K. And so what this is really good about what this is really helpful with is like you can
plan out your orders with a set level of exposure, right, for your cash flow. And it also sets the

expectations with your manufacturer where they can understand what they actually have to step
out and operate within their own comfort zone with you. Right.
So this is an this is an arrangement that can definitely be achieved, especially after you establish
an order history with them. And again, it's so helpful when you're forecasting because you can
you can plan out what that cash flow exposure is well in advance with your credit limit with them.
Yeah, something something I've found success with when negotiating a line of credit terms is.
You know, I was in a situation where I was developing products with a factory that we were also
ordering currently selling product with. And, you know, the product development fees started to
get a little bit overwhelming. We're paying for R&D fees for their engineers.
We're paying for samples. We're paying for certifications. We're paying for tooling.
And, you know, all of this is happening without us actually able to generate any revenue with the
spend. And so what we said is like, hey, in order for us to actually develop a new product and
increase our revenue with you over time, like you're going to need to give us some sort of line of
credit terms on the products that we're currently producing with you so that we can continue down
the product development process with you. And that, you know, worked out for us.
We were able to get really significant line of credit terms with them and then, you know, launch
several products in a year. Overall, I think that like one of the messages that I would say is like
great for people to remember is there as they're listening to us and thinking about payment terms.
It's important not to be discouraged if you just don't right out of the gate get, you know, oh, I really
I wanted net terms.
I wanted net 30 terms. I wanted net 60 terms right off the bat. There are creative methods that
you can employ to try to come up with a favorable interim solution as you work towards your
more attractive payment terms.
It's not a nothing game. I agree. I mean, it's it, you know, it takes time to like, you know, let's
move to the next slide as well.
But like, it does take time for, you know, factories sometimes to warm up to the to the concept,
especially if you're just starting out with a relationship like they don't know you. You don't know
them like it's, you know, they have to trust you first. They have you.
They also have to see that, like, you know, pay your bills on time. You're you know, you're really
you're really good about handling orders with them. Like, you know, to just get payment terms off
the bat, I think is is quite difficult.
You know, you would have to like prove, you know, like a lot to them. You'd have to you'd have to
show them like in some cases we've dealt with having to provide like our financial statements,
P&L balance sheet, you know, historical sales, things like that, credit checks. I mean, when when

you when you have like a good relationship or at least the purchasing relationship with the
supplier, like they do become more flexible because they're seeing the opportunity.
They kind of they kind of see like the growth. So, you know, again, like, you're not going to get it
out of the gate. And even if you don't get it in the beginning or you don't get it after a few months,
like it's all about like nurturing that relationship and just coming up with creative solutions on like
just a better payment term set up than before.
And you just keep inching closer and closer. And I think it's a good segue into this next slide of
the power of in-person negotiations. I think the three of us could could talk about various
experiences of when we do that, like, especially on behalf of our clients.
So I'd say, CJ, since you're on the ground in in China and, you know, we kind of tap on you to go
to Pat for the brands we work with. Yeah, I'll let you kind of like give the rundown on just like how
powerful it is when you're when you're meeting with factory owners and building a relationship
with them to get better payment terms. Yeah, so I'll start this off by saying, you know, being on
the ground here, whether it's, you know, regular visits or you're here permanently, like I am just,
you know, the supplier knowing that they're going to see you several times a year, whenever they
want, they can pick up the phone and like reach out to you that you're you show you show a
sense of credibility to them.
Right. And availability, the last thing that they want, especially if you're running an international
business and, you know, there's there's not really any way for them to, like, come and find you if
you were to say, like, disappear after they give you like a sweet deal. So, you know, just just
proving that, you know, you're going to be around, you're setting up a nice business relationship
with them and then just constantly nurturing it, just like you would nurture any relationship really
goes a long way, especially in China.
China's like a very relationship driven culture. And they love when their foreign customers come
to the factory to see it. It almost becomes like a full team building experience for them.
Everyone gets really excited about, you know, entertaining you, showing you around, showing
you the ropes, making making sure you understand the whole process. But it also gives you a
real insight into what their business model looks like and what they're actually capable of giving
you or not, so that when you come to the table for negotiating different payment terms with them,
you kind of know how to frame it in a way that is going to be more appropriate or more easy for
them to accept or hear it. Right.
Yeah. I mean, I think that like you would also hit the nail on the head where it's like it's also just
about relationship building to in any you know what I mean? Just like in any relationship, having
face time with someone is extremely important. And so like going there and being there in
person, it could actually mean the difference when you're having a negotiation to them, wanting to

help you and not.
Right. Like if you get if you've met with them in person, you show that you care about them and
you value them as a partner. It means that you're serious about your business and that you and
that you you think that they're an important part of your success.
So I think that it's going to make them more willing to be invested in your in your success. Yeah.
Yeah.
I remember like I think yeah, I think, CJ, we could just like talk about some like just without like
revealing like client information. But just like I remember like on one of our client trips where we
took them to their suppliers and we had like a private meeting, just like some of the preparations
that we had them do so that we could really figure out like a good payment term structure. One in
particular was in the skin care space.
And, you know, we did a whole presentation on just like, you know, what their what their sales
volume was for the year, explaining what the customer acquisition costs because like factories
don't understand e-com, you know. And and then like what kind of growth potential they could
have by, you know, unlocking more cash flow for them, you know, with better payment terms.
And, you know, really walking them through, walking the suppliers through it and dumbing it down
for them because they don't you know, they don't really know like how, you know, e-com guys are
selling.
It made like the conversation like so much easier. You know, we were all very patient. You know,
of course, the clients didn't speak Chinese, but like, you know, the smile and nodding let us
handle kind of like the communication part.
But we were able to succeed at getting I think it was net, I think it was like a 20 percent deposit.
And then the balance payment was about it was like 45 days after delivery or no, it was sorry, 60
days after shipping out of out of China. And for the skin care industry, I do think it's important to
note that's an that's an industry that's a little bit more challenging to get like these very aggressive
payment terms that a lot of people hear about from other e-com guys because like you're making
your own formula most of the time.
And when you when you're doing that, they have to procure specific ingredients for you. It's not
like they can necessarily use those ingredients for like other brands. So like if you're white
labeling something that they always have stock of, OK, maybe that's going to be a little bit
different.
But if you're doing like custom formulation stuff, like, for example, there was an anti-aging serum
that we created for a brand and there was like a certain ingredient from France. We had to get
like we had to buy that that one ingredient in bulk and like that can't like that factory can't use that
for anybody else. So, you know, if you're going to get payment terms, but then they know that

they're not going to be able to move it if your sales would ever go down.
So there's an element of risk when you're dealing with that. Whereas if we're talking about
gadgets and you're doing a lot of like white labeling, like we don't have like a custom gadget.
Those factories like are typically like procuring a lot of the materials in advance anyway, because
they work with like multiple brands that are producing.
So they kind of always have to have stock of it. That's like less risky for them to offer better
payment terms because they know that they're going to be able to continue moving volume. So
when when you are in like different industry, you are going to get a different set of payment
terms.
It also kind of depends on your cogs, too. So that's just some stuff to really just be mindful of, too,
like when you're when you're meeting with them at the factory and maybe they're giving you some
pushback. It's like really important to kind of understand like how they assess risk so that like
you're not like feeling like insulted or feeling like they're being too difficult.
So and like that's why it's important to like do a lot of this negotiation stuff like with the supplier,
because like this is your opportunity to really like understand each other's businesses and really
try to reach like a happy medium. You got to be diplomatic as much as possible with them. Once
it's once like the meetings are over, like, you know, in China, they love to take you out to dinner
and drink and like really get connected with you.
They really do like mix, you know, business and friendship more than, you know, and other
cultures for sure. So that's a good opportunity for you to get super close with them, like drink as
much as if they're not drinking. Of course, you don't need to drink.
But if they are like, you know, that's what like I think CJ, Chris and me always do. Like, we'll just
keep drinking, having fun, you know, creating good stories. When we go to KTV, I mean, CJ
doesn't sing, but like, you know, Chris and I will sing whatever it is, Backstreet Boys, who cares?
Because like the idea is you want to be like their best friend.
You want to get preferential treatment from them. And you also want them to trust you. Like it's
like they're kind of testing you in a way, like when you're when you're becoming close with them
as friends.
Right. Like if they could see that you're like a genuine good person and like you like to have a
good time. I think like that will will give you a better path to achieving your ultimate goal of like
really good payment terms.
So, you know, visiting China is super important. We love to take our clients there. And I think it's I
think it's like a really good experience overall and really helps like people understand the culture,
too.

Like as you go through that experience, like to be honest, I can't wait for us to do our trip. In
March, just to like, you know, we have some clients coming with us where it'll be their first time.
And I just think it's a blast every time because it's, you know, everyone's so hospitable and
friendly.
But you get so much done as well. Yeah, Greg, to touch a little more on that specific example you
were just talking about. You know, we we went we went with a client who'd been purchasing from
this factory for about a year.
And they wanted to go in and start talking about payment terms. They also wanted to go in and
just understand the landscape of the sub vendors. Right.
There's a lot of other factories and suppliers that are involved along the supply chain that get to
your final factory that's in charge of the assembly. Right. And that's like what Greg was talking
about earlier, where there are certain raw materials that you're getting from either distributors or
you're having to import it or whatever the case is.
So, you know, we showed up with a really nice outline and forecast and plan, kind of like what I
was talking about earlier, where it's like, hey, here's where we're at now. With the current
payment terms and here's where we could be if you gave us some more favorable terms. And
then we got to the bottom of like, OK, what's the key material that is needed in that product? And
then the factory was able to explain it to us or like, oh, we're actually importing this this material.
And so the lead time is two months, I believe it was. And so it was also important for them to
understand what the forecast is, because then that allows them to optimize their production
planning, their production line. All of these things so that they're able to increase their margins,
give you better pricing and then also give you better payment terms.
And so it's really more about the long term planning and making it a win win situation for
everyone else. You really need to keep an open mind and be flexible about things like that when
you go and speak with the factories, because if you're just going in and saying like, hey, I've done
this business for a while, I deserve a better price and I deserve better payment terms. They're
going to be like, cool, but like, here's what it costs for our operation to do this.
And, you know, there needs to be certain milestones or planning that to be a little bit more
strategic about it. Something we didn't mention here, I know we spent a while talking about this,
you know, the power of being in person for new negotiations. But something we didn't touch on is
there can be a lot of other benefits to going in person and meeting with your manufacturer.
When you're working in southern China, you're kind of at this cross section of new technology
and manufacturability where you can learn about different product trends. You can learn about
the capabilities of your manufacturer and new technologies that they're working with that other
people might not even be aware of. And so by, you know, by going in person, these

manufacturers might share details with you that you might not otherwise be able to, you know, be
able to see.
So, again, there's just a there's a ton of value to talking to them about what's popular, what
they've what they've been hearing about on the technology side. And what you know, what types
of product offerings they could extend to you as well. You might end up kind of expanding your
own product portfolio through talking to them.
Yeah. All right. I think this is also like this next concept is a pretty good concept is just like
leveraging group buying power.
So, I mean, typically it's best to be, you know, working with like a sourcing company, for example.
You know, this isn't just a plug about us. Like it's it's really it's a strategy that you could leverage if
you're you know, if you're trying to get payment terms a little bit faster.
I think I think this like I think we can give really good examples in like the skincare and
supplement space on this slide. CJ, you know what? I think it would be cool for you to kind of like
explain like how like group buying power or that concept works. It's not like, you know, we don't
mean like, you know, two brands try to buy from the same supplier together because that's
doesn't really work that way.
But why don't you dive into the concept a little bit? Yeah, like you don't you don't want to show up
with like a group of e-commerce to a factory and be like, oh, like all five of us are going to place
orders with you like hook us up. That's that's not what we're talking about here. But I mean, using
canary as an example is fine.
Like we represent over 100 different brand owners when we buy from factories. And so when it
comes to some of our common niches like skincare supplements, some types of gadgets,
depending on, you know, if we can if we can consolidate it at different factories or not, you know,
which. We don't need to get too deep into how that works with us in this module, but, you know,
we have certain leverages and certain terms that like we get just because of how the business we
represent with them from the factory.
And so like canary is getting the terms. It's not you that's getting the terms. And then we're we're
then able to extend those terms to you.
And like I said, it's not agnostic to canary. If you're working with a fulfillment company because
their fulfillment company is doing, you know, sourcing a bigger scale than we are in some cases
for certain niches like they're working with a handful of factories that they're very familiar with and
have good relationships with. And so if they're telling you, like, hey, I can't get payment terms on
this, like you need to ask them, like, OK, well, why aren't you going to a factory that you have a
relationship with that can give you payment terms or like what does that look like? So just
something to be cognizant of.

And don't be afraid to ask that, you know, like there if you're if you're dealing with someone who's
helping you get your products made, there are probably going to be multiple different options for
them to get payment terms with you, because I promise you they're getting payment. Yeah, I
mean, I think like I think if fulfillment companies are really going to be sourcing like I think, you
know, and you and you're going to be an e-commerce going to be working with them for it. Like, I
think I think you've got to push them, like, because when you're if you're fulfillment and sourcing,
you're probably doing a lot of like drop shipping models with with clients.
And like these are these are these are companies that that are have an extensive network with
manufacturers. A lot of them do also work with trade companies, too, though. But, you know, just
like think about it like, you know, clearly like you're not the only person that's like buying from the
factory that they're buying from, especially if it's like in skin care or something like fulfillment
companies are more simple in the way they are doing their sourcing, too.
So they're just going to they're going to have like, you know, their their main skin care supplier
that they're going to use for everyone. They're not going to like build out like a whole skin care
supplier network. So like, you know, same thing with like supplements, too, like they're just going
to feed it to like the same supplier.
So like if you're working with them, the likelihood is quite high that they probably do it for more
than a dozen brands, for example. I mean, it depends on what company you're talking to, but like
I would totally challenge them on the payment terms aspect. And if they're not giving it to you,
push them as to like why they can't why they can't offer it or why can't like the factory offer it.
So I do think, you know, I do think you have like leverage in a way because you could always try
sourcing stuff yourself or, you know, you could work with just a sourcing company. Like so, you
know, I do think leveraging group buying power could be really helpful, especially like if you like
have proof that you're like a fast growing brand and like, you know, your marketing efficiency ratio
is high. You have good cash flow.
So, you know, there's no there's no hurt in challenging them because you always have other
options. Yeah, and in some cases, if you have a partner like that, that is doing, you know,
sourcing fulfillment for multiple brands, you know, they're going to know a little bit more about
what you're about and they might even have some sort of flexibility to offer certain payment terms
to you, depending on what the situation is. Moving on to this reduced supplier risk, you know, if
you're working with a company that has some sort of presence in China and they can enter
legally binding contracts on your behalf with factories in China, which also goes a long way, you
know, international contracts in China.
If you're a U.S. company or a European company and you're trying to enter a contract with a
company in China, like it's it's pretty much just a suggestion on a piece of paper and it doesn't
really hold any legal weight. Like they're not going to be able to come after you to get the money

back. And like, you're also not really going to have you're going to have a hard time going after
them.
You know, if you have other like delivery timeline stipulations or quality stipulations or things like
that. And so having a local partner to help reduce risk on both sides also goes a long way. When
trying to get payment terms, yeah.
Yeah, no, I think that's I think this is this is a pretty cool concept to just be thinking about, you
know, if you're if you're really trying to leverage your resources over there. All right. So moving on
to leveraging tariffs and policy shifts.
Yeah, Chris, I think like this is a pretty good topic for you because I know I know from your
experience there's like interesting like create from all of our experience at this point. I feel like I
feel like to some extent now everyone in the econ space is in, you know, been impacted by tariffs
and so, you know, so have manufacturers. But look, you know, tariffs, they have been impacting
everyone.
But what rather than just kind of like, you know, just taking the brunt of the tariffs and just, you
know, suffering as a result of it, you can actually try to create some leverage by using that as a
discussion point in your tariffs negotiations. Right. Because a lot of companies, when they're
doing their their imports of their product, they have to pay their duties when when the goods clear
customs.
Right. And so that means it's an additional cost that's paid like pretty much right up front there.
Right.
And outside of some arrangements that we'll get into in a minute here on tariffs, you know, that
that is an upfront cost that you can communicate with your manufacturer and be like, look, you
know, this is my product cost before. This is what it is now. And I have to pay it out of pocket just
to get my goods delivered to my warehouse.
So I'd really like it if you could help to extend some leniency to my company, give us some sort of
payment terms arrangement or some other pricing alleviation. Right. You know, you can
negotiate flexibility.
It's not just on the pricing where you ask for a discount, but maybe some extended payment
terms. They might be amenable to try to extend that to you because, again, they do understand
it's not just you that this is impacting. It's everybody.
But you do establish a real need then for that flexibility. One thing I do encourage here, though,
for for all brand owners is to look into something called periodic monthly statement with customs
border patrol. So what this is, is you can switch over to a method for paying for your duties where
you can set to monthly payments and it can be a credit arrangement rather than just being an

automatic debit.
I know that like the tariffs have been in place for a little while now, but there was a point in time
when these tariffs were on and off, on and off different, you know, different, different percentages
for different products on different days. And people were getting overwhelmed because they were
getting debited automatically for their imports. And they didn't even know if they were being billed
accurately.
They didn't have the time to review it. Right. Imagine trying to run and scale a business, but also
be looking over the line items on all of your entry filings to clear customs.
Like it's it's daunting. What's great about having like a periodic monthly statement credit
arrangement is you have more time than to review for accuracy on all of the duties that you're
being assessed for import. So not only does it open up your cash flow a little bit to buy you some
time, but it also gives you that time to review for accuracy.
So, again, I do encourage people to to look into that. Yeah. Yeah.
It's almost like payment terms for your duty payments. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Exactly.
Like so I think like when it comes to so I think we covered a lot about the payment terms with like
manufacturers. But there's also in the supply chain, the whole the shipping aspect of things. Like,
for example, if you're if you're if you're doing a ton of bulk shipments per month, you probably
could start doing like net 30 terms on your previous 30 days of shipping.
Right. So that's that's like a quick way. I mean, it's a small it's a smaller amount of money
compared to your your product costs.
But, you know, that's just like another way of freeing up cash flow. And I think also, you know, you
could you could work out like what Chris was saying about optimizing custom payments. I mean,
that's a big one, too, because like, you know, it could just be more like time to do better cash flow
planning when you're when you're getting into a better system for customs payments.
So I do think also another area that would be like tariff related and we could just talk like briefly
about it, but would be these these free trade zones if they have space. There's a lot of paperwork
that you have to do before shipping it there. It's not like, oh, hey, can we can we just send it to a
free trade zone? Like, there's there's some contractual agreements.
They can't open up the container like until you until it's like ready to leave. Like there's like certain
rules that they have, you know, in order to utilize it. But that's like a good way to especially like
when the tariffs were like super unstable and it was like going up to 140 percent and back down
and back up.
Like if you had sent it to a free trade zone, you could essentially just like wait out the the, you

know, the results and then you would be paying the duties when it's like finally negotiated. But at
least your stuff is there. You don't have to worry.
You don't have to keep the weighing your shipping date and, you know, having to deal with that
30 day clock. And then just like if you're going to be utilizing a free trade zone, like communicate
with your factory to see like how flexible they can be with that arrangement, you know. So it's like
really important to to be, you know, figuring out like, you know, what's the best payment terms
you can get in like the world of like shipping, but also communicating with your factory to like how
like how can they be helpful with it as well? You know, they are they are your partner.
So, you know, you should you should feel comfortable just talking freely with them. Yeah, another
thing, Greg, that just kind of came to mind as you were talking about, you know, the shipping
payment terms and being flexible is like, if you're if you're working with a fulfillment company, like,
also see what you can do on that. And oftentimes the fulfillment cost is going to be more than
what the product cost is.
And so like a bigger win would maybe be trying to get payment terms on your shipping or your
fulfillment with them than than relying on payment terms from the factory. You know, the fact the
factory is doing bulk orders at once. They're going to be shipping thousands of units out at the
same time.
The shipping company is doing, you know, just however much you're ordering a day. If you could
even just delay your payments to weekly or biweekly, it could also free up a ton of cash flow. And
it's something interesting to look at for sure.
Yep. OK, so moving on to just like some takeaways on this module, and, you know, this one was
definitely a longer one that we've done, but I do think like this is a pretty important topic. A lot of
people do talk about it in the evolve community.
So it's just it was I think it was just important for like the three of us to kind of just like give as
much insight as possible. But, yeah, I would say, you know, these would be some key takeaways
from the module being creative and prepared. You know, you do want to be flexible with the
manufacturer and really try to figure out like, you know, when they're being like resistant.
Like why? Without just being too confrontational either. And just knowing like if they're not going
to meet your, you know, they're not they're not going to come to the terms that you want. Like,
well, what's the path look like? Like, what do you have to prove to be able to do that? That way,
at least, you know, OK, my payment terms are better, but I need to perform to X in order to
unlock this like new threshold.
But then at least you now know there's like a like a plan for you to get there. So I do think just
being creative and prepared, you know, investing in relationships, you know, just like what we
said with visiting the factory, you know, going. There's no bad time except for Chinese New Year,

I would say, you know, Q4 people would just be kind of, you know, running around with their
heads cut off.
But like and also you guys got to be locked in during that time. But like, you know, just go just
visiting your supplier periodically and just like building, building trust, like making sure that they
know that like you care about them as people and like you also like care about them as a as a as
a partner to your business. You know, it really does go a long way from I'd say from like living in
China for as long as I have for like 10 years.
Like I could think of like loads of manufacturers that like I've now known for so long. And it's like,
you know, we're super close friends at this point. And, you know, it's amazing like when you get
into a jam, like, you know, how much they're willing to be helpful for you, too.
So I do think investing in relationships is important. And then just focus on like sustainable
growth. You know, it's not just about your cash flow today.
You know, it's really a critical tool for scaling your brand over time. So, you know, you do I'd say
like the more level headed you are and really trying to figure out like the best growth strategy and
helping the manufacturers understand that. Because let's just say like they don't want to give you
great payment terms, but they want to really work with you on optimizing the lead time.
Maybe that requires them to make a strategic investment for you to unlock that faster lead time.
Well, you know, maybe you didn't get the payment terms, but you just got, you know, lead times
cut from like 20 days to seven days. And that means you don't have to place as big of orders.
So there are like ways of getting, you know, these types of terms just by like, you know,
communicating with your supplier and like seeing, you know, what's like the best growth model
with them. Yeah. Well said, man.
Yeah. Awesome. Awesome.
All right. So that's it for this module. And we will be going into the next one shortly.
Yeah, you guys can you guys can find us at CanarySolutions.com. I think our emails might be
posted to this module as well. And you can reach out to me on the Discord at any time as well.
Yeah.
And if, yeah, if you ever, you know, want to reach out to any of us, you can always reach out to
me on X. And I'm happy to happy to chat with you there. But, you know, we also are at a lot of
events. But, you know, feel free to ping us, like even even if it's just about like just getting like
advice on something like we're pretty we're pretty open.
So, you know, we look forward to continuing to help out. All right. See you guys in the next one.



======================================================================
FILE: Perform Due Diligence on Manufacturers - Evolve Supply Chain Pro.txt
======================================================================

Perform Due Diligence on Manufacturers - Evolve Supply Chain Pro
All right, so we're going to kick it off with going over how to perform due diligence on
manufacturers. I would say for this topic, this is where it all starts, at least when we take on a
client, it always starts with having to do the due diligence and just figure out who's the right
factory to work with and just make sense of the product that we're looking into. So I think a lot of
what we're going to be walking you through today is kind of like how we go about things when it
comes to figuring out the right supplier to work with.
So I'm going to let CJ go over why due diligence matters. Yeah, so Greg, like you said, due
diligence is really where everything starts. If you're trying to create a product, you need to find the
right partner to help you create the products.
They're going to be responsible for the raw material procurement. They're going to be responsible
for the quality control. They're going to be responsible for the final assembly, making sure that
everything's all packaged up nicely and out the door on time.
And most importantly, I would say, you're going to be communicating with them a lot. So you
really want to evaluate how their communication habits are, if they're communicating things
clearly. Like when we ask them questions, are they answering directly or are they kind of just
talking circles around you? These are all different things that we take into consideration when
we're looking into factories in regards to due diligence, right? Yeah, I mean, this foundational step
is just, if you build on a poor foundation, then you can't expect good results.
And so this step is just, it's so important to make sure that you're working with the right
manufacturer. All right, let's go over the initial research. So to really identify potential factories to
be working with, just start off going on the platforms.
I remember when I started Canary with John and Jerry, and it was just the three of us. And I
mean, Jerry is obviously using some of the Chinese platforms, but then I'm also using Alibaba.
And you don't know who's a factory.
I mean, it's a minefield when you go on Alibaba. So the way I did it was, I pretty much hit up like
50 plus companies, and I just reached out to all of them, was like, add me on WeChat. And the
ones that didn't add me on WeChat, I'm like, great, you don't know how to follow directions, so
we're not even going to count you.
Because the workflow is really important as well. So you start off on those platforms. I think some
people are like spending a lot of time like looking at the profiles and like looking at the product
pictures.
But that doesn't tell you enough about the factory you're going to be working with. Sometimes
they just like, they're not really investing their time in like setting up the listing, they're just getting

the listing up. And what's tough is like trade companies like to appear like they are factories.
So you're on there and you're searching and you think you're looking at a factory, but you're not.
You're just looking at stock photos, essentially. Or you're looking at a trade company where they
just took pictures at the factory that they work with.
So for me, that's why I tried avoiding getting too into the listings itself, just making sure that they
know how to make the product and then just aggressively reaching out to people. The other thing
that you can do besides going on the platforms is, if you're dealing with skincare or something like
that, you can look up the FDA database. For medical devices, there's a database you're able to
look at.
You can look at trade associations, you can look at expos that are coming up and they give you a
list of the exhibitors. So there's a variety of ways to be researching factories. Like one of the
contract manufacturers we work with, with skincare, they produce for Dior and stuff, they're not
going on Alibaba.
You kind of have to really search around and find your way. LinkedIn is a weird one that I oddly
had success with. It's definitely not something that you can, it's not like using Alibaba, but if you're
really trying to get granular and find something special, you could maybe do a little bit of a search
on that.
So the initial research is really just casting a wide net to just see who you could reach out to and
then hitting them all up and getting ready to have a million conversations. When I was doing it, I
was probably doing this from like eight at night till four a.m. every day for the first two years of
Canary. So yeah, it's a lot of work.
All right, so how do we distinguish factories from trade companies? DJ, I think this would be a
good one for you since it's, you know, even from the outreach and everything, it's so easy to fool
us, you know? Yeah, so even being here on the ground sometimes it can be a little tricky, right?
Factories are generally going to have a sales rep or someone that speaks to you, but they also
will collaborate with a lot of different trade companies too. So it's really difficult to tell if you're
speaking with a trade company or a factory, but factories will generally give you a lot more
concise and specific information with the questions you're asking. They're going to be responding
a lot more quickly because they have access to certain specifications or certificates or things like
that immediately, whereas a trade company is going to have to go through a different type of
communication breakdown.
And you can really just tell by how knowledgeable they are about certain details of a product,
whether they're a trade company or a factory or not. You know, a trade company is not going to
be as professional as, you know, someone who is an engineer, has direct access to an engineer
at a factory. So another interesting point which can kind of backfire if you're trying to do this
yourself, like a factory might not be as savvy with communication as a trade company is.

And so if you're speaking to someone and you think like, oh, their communication is a little weird,
like maybe their English isn't so great, but they seem to really know what they're talking about,
that might not necessarily be a red flag. That might be a sign that you're actually speaking with a
factory. Whereas if you're speaking with a trading company who's used to doing international
business and, you know, communicating some of these things in English a lot, the
communication might seem a little bit smoother at the surface.
But once you dig deeper into some of the details, you're able to find out if they're really affiliated
with the factory or not. Yeah, I think that definitely makes sense. I think that if, you know, I think
that as you're considering whether you're working with a factory or with a trading company,
something that you're going to want to really keep in mind is how much customization or detailed
work is going to be needed from the manufacturer.
If you're going through a custom design or have a lot of modifications that you're planning on
making or optimizations, working directly with the factory is definitely going to pay off more for
you because the trading company might not be able to reach that level of detail, speak with so
much authority or even enact those requested changes, modifications, improvements that a
factory would be able to. Right. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. I'd say too, like when it comes to like here's like just like kind of like a quick tip about
like just knowing if you're talking to a trade company or even just seeing it in a listing, the city, you
know, like you just gotta, you just gotta take a look at, because usually like Chinese companies,
it's like the city at the, as like the first part of the name.
So if you, if you see like Zhengzhou, for example, on Alibaba, that'll be like the city I give you.
Like there's no factories there. I've been to Zhengzhou like 10 times.
That's in dead center of China. It's not factory land at all. It's one of Hunan province is I think the
most populated province in China over a hundred million people.
But that is, that is not where factories are. And it also like, you know, there are factories more
inland, but most of the time, like when you're going to, you know, you should really get a map.
And just when you start to see these cities, like look where it is on the map and, and you could,
you could see like, does it make sense for a factory to be in this area? Because most of the stuff
is getting exported.
So they're going to want to be as close to the port as possible. Otherwise it's, it's going to be a
pain in the ass to, to be able to have to like truck that stuff to the port or ship it by, by train, like
infrastructure is not like what it is in, in developed countries. So you know, like when it comes to
just like knowing that about a trade company, I think you could easily eliminate options.
And like when you see like Hangzhou, Yiwu, I mean Yiwu, there's a lot of factories, but like you

could just start to like pay attention to like doing some different product category searches and
you'll start to see that like these products are concentrated in a specific city. So, you know, just
quickly look at the trends as to like where, you know, all these factories are located from the list
you have and like you can quickly see, oh, okay. Shenzhen, like that's where all, Dongguan,
that's where all the electronics are made.
Oh, it makes sense that the factory would be here. If you see it in any other province, I don't know
if that's really going to be, make any sense. You know, it's, it's, it's not, you know, you should just
like follow that methodology and like, I think it'll be very easy for you to eliminate options,
especially when you're dealing in like niche categories.
It's a really interesting barometer when you think about like what we know and we, and you hear
from people who are new to the space developing a new product and you ask them where their
products being developed, you can get like a very quick idea reliably on, you know, how
experienced they are with what they're working on. Yeah, I think it's, it's a really, it's a really great
point. Yeah.
Yeah. So how, how do you evaluate a response to CJ? Um, there are two things I mainly look at
when I'm looking at evaluating responses. One is going to be, um, the speed at which they
respond at and two is going to be how directly they're communicating.
Chinese culturally is not a very direct, uh, you know, communication style of, of a culture or even
a language, right? Uh, the language is also, there's a lot of idioms and phrases and things like
that that you just kind of talk around, um, you know, questions that are being answered. So when
you find someone that's like straight up and answering quickly and they're answering directly
what you asked them with something that makes sense and, and is actually what you want to
hear, that's going to be a win in my book, right? Um, you also want to look at some other things.
Once you find someone who can communicate like that, like how well do they actually
understand the product that you're talking about? Um, you're going to want to understand a little
bit about their factory size and that means, you know, how many line workers do they have? How
big is their QC team? What type of resources do they have when it comes to testing or
production? Like, are they running automated lines? Uh, what type of testing equipment do they
have? Um, and, and just like the team size that's dedicated to it, you're going to want to ask them
like, okay, am I going to have a project manager or is it going to be a sales manager? Can I have
direct access to the engineers or not? A factory is like to kind of gatekeep a lot of their, you know,
engineering department or R and D department and, and, you know, funnel communication
through a salesperson or a project manager and stuff.
And I really don't prefer to work like that. Um, especially I guess like with the background I have
being so technical and hands on with product development and things like that, I'd rather just skip
that whole process and get straight to the engineer myself. So that's a big one I look at.

Um, you're, you're going to want to see what type of certifications they have and try to verify if
they're legit or not. Um, you know, for example, we just had a client reach out to us saying, you
know, trying to verify the testing labs that we use for one of their skincare products because, uh,
they're, they're trying to strike a deal with Walmart right now. And they had sent a list over of
testing labs in China that they don't accept test reports from.
We don't exactly know why, you know, and thankfully none of our test reports with the factories
we're working at are from those labs because we, you know, done this due diligence and then
gotten the certifications and made sure they were from reputable people. Um, that being said, we
also work directly with, you know, some of the big certifying, um, labs like SGS, Intertech, those,
those types of people. Um, and then again, this final point here, right at analyzing communication
efficiency, it, you're going to be talking to this person all the time.
You don't want to be dealing with someone that makes you want to pull your hair out. Nice. Um,
yeah, I'd say that's a pretty well said, pretty well said.
Okay. Um, so, uh, we actually go over this in, in module, uh, what was it, module one. Um, but,
uh, I think this is a, like an important, um, you know, slide to kind of just go over advantages and
disadvantages and CJ, since you're going to, uh, you know, you're the one that's been like going
to factories more, more so than, than Chris and I, you know, you're based there.
Um, you want to just kind of walk us through, especially this like small, medium and large factory
situation. Yeah. Yeah.
So if, if we are doing due diligence and you're looking at a factory, you know, there's going to be
advantages to working directly with the factory and disadvantages. Um, you're going straight to
the source. You're going to be getting potentially the best pricing factories do also like to play
games.
So be mindful of that and try to really understand what the cost is. Ask them for a bill of materials,
try to understand how much profit they're making and what their operation expenses. And then
you're going to have to do some analysis on it.
And then again, the more openly and efficiently they're communicating with you, the more likely it
is that they're going to be able to give you these types of documents. Right. Um, and then you're
going to want to collaborate with them on product creation and product development.
So you want to make sure that you feel comfortable with them and that you can, you know, you
kind of have a vibe with them and communication is easy. Um, you know, there are different size
factories, small factories, I would say, you know, between 50, maybe 75 people, maybe 50 or
less people. It depends on like the, the structure of it.
Right. Those factories are going to, you know, paint you a beautiful picture and tell you that they

can do everything. And then when it comes down to it, maybe they don't have the resources to do
everything that they said, or they're doing a poor job at it.
So that's something to be mindful of, especially if you're not on the ground here. Um, you know,
medium size factories are probably going to have better pricing just because they'll have better
systems in place. Um, they'll be able to operate more efficiently and then they'll have more
resources.
Generally they'll have like larger, uh, R and D team, or they'll have, you know, more testing
facilities and, uh, machines and quality processes and things in place. Um, uh, but they're not
going to be suitable for some smaller sized orders when you're just getting started. So it's
important to kind of figure out where you're at and then if you fit with the factory business model
or not.
Um, a medium sized factory is probably going to be, I would say between 100 and 200 people.
Um, and then large factories would be, you know, 200 and up their factories with 500,000
thousands of people. Um, they're going to have extensive resources.
They're going to have really high capacity, but their MOQs are generally really, really high. Um,
you're going to wait a long time to get onto the production line. There's like a queue, a production
queue to get into certain lines with them there.
Um, and there's usually a lot of internal processes and things in place with larger factories that
make things that I was talking about earlier, like getting direct communication with an engineer or
being able to freely go and like visit the production line anytime you want and things like that.
They're just kind of a little bit more buttoned up in those areas. So they're not really free as, as, as
free range as some of the smaller factories are.
So you're doing super high capacity, super high volume stuff. Maybe a large factory is a fit for
you, but generally it's the small and medium guys that I prefer to work with. Um, so now some of
the disadvantages with working in factories, um, it's really difficult to control what's going on if
you're doing it on your own, especially if you're not here on the ground in China.
Um, if you're running a business that has multiple SKUs and different niches, or even if it's slightly
different niches, you know, a factory might not be able to produce everything that you need,
which would mean that you'd have to go to other factories. And so instead of going to one spot to
get everything like a sourcing company or a trading company or something like that, now, you
know, you're, you're dealing with multiple factories at once. And that really stretches your
bandwidth thin.
Um, you know, and, and when you're ordering lower volumes, it makes you less of a priority,
which again is a problem with your bandwidth. If you're not a priority and you're like constantly
chasing these people up, um, you kind of have to put one thing down to go and work on another.

And then one factory relationship suffers while you go and nurture this other one.
And you're just kind of playing this, this juggling game between factories. Um, so there, there are
pros and cons to it. The choice is really yours.
This is just kind of our two cents and things that we look for when, when we're dealing with
factories, you know, we're, we're set up to deal with many factories. We have a team that is
dedicated to only getting, you know, proper factories for certain products and things like that. But,
you know, as a brand owner, that's trying to scale a business that might not be feasible for you.
All right. All right. Yeah.
I'd say, um, it really depends on the product category you're in, um, in terms of, uh, you know,
should you be working with like a small, medium or large factory? It also depends on the volume
that you're doing. Uh, it depends on your tolerance, um, for, uh, you know, what kind of lead
times you're willing to deal with. Like for example, working with like a contract manufacturer, um,
you know, uh, in skincare, like the one that we work with that produces for like Dior and stuff like
that.
I mean, it's very difficult to get them to reduce their lead times significantly, but they are making
very high quality products. So, you know, you just have to, you just have to think about like which
factory is right for you and your needs that, you know, what's your cashflow position. Um, and,
uh, you know, then you can kind of back into, you know, what's the right factory to work with.
You know, if you're just starting out, you, you probably do, you want to work with, uh, probably
like a medium sized factory. I'd say small factory is only in situations like if you have, you have a
lot of experience, it's a, it's a factory that's just open, but the owner is a, um, is an engineer type
of thing. And it's just running like a pretty small, like operation, but the quality is good.
Those are the gems, but again, those are like not easy to find. Um, but yeah, I would say, um,
you know, overall from a, like CJ said, like, these are like kind of the things to be thinking about
when it comes to the factories. Um, all right, let's dive into compliance and certifications.
You want to take the floor on that, Chris? Yeah, sure. So depending on the type of product that
you're planning to develop, it's important to consider compliance and certifications and whether or
not the prospective factory partner that you're looking to work with has those required
certifications. So for example, has this manufacturer has this manufacturer been involved in
developing that kind of product in the past? And if so, then can they speak with authority about
the certifications that they're working on? Um, that for example, like if you're in the toy industry,
do you have, they worked on products that have been CPSIA certified.
So their engineers on their side are familiar with those requirements for children's products. Are
you working on a medical device and require a factory that's ISO 13485 certified, right? I think

that in general, if you're looking at the certification, so the factory holds, it gives you some insight
into the maturity of their operational processes of their, um, quality management systems. So for
example, if you're going in looking through different manufacturers and you see that they have
their ISO certifications in place, it means that they are likely much more advanced and buttoned
up and have like a much more reliable, uh, level of quality and support for their interactions with
their clients.
Um, that you, you know, you can come to expect that from them. Uh, so I think again, it's kind of
important to understand has this factory manufactured your type of product before and gotten the,
the relevant certifications in that product category? And then do they hold any operational
certificates that verify that they're upholding high levels of quality? And, you know, depending on
what you're, what you're developing, it's going to be, this can be a really quick litmus test to know
that you're on the right track and you're talking to a really good partner. All right.
All right. Let's, uh, go into engineering and production. I'll let, I'll let you take that one CJ.
Yeah. So when you're doing due diligence on a factory, it's important that you, uh, you know,
have a good vibe with the engineering and production staff. That means that, you know, the R
and D person engineer in charge of your project really understands the vision that you have.
Um, they're looking at the product, not just as like another thing that they're going to produce, but
actually as something that solves a problem and bring something to the market. Um, they're
going to be someone that can get involved in the actual production process and doesn't just like
draw a file, 3d print something, and then hand it off to someone and say like, all right, cool. Now
let's assemble this.
It's going to be someone who is going to be working countless hours with the quality team and
the production team, working with you to get your quality control and SOPs put in place. And then
also, you know, taking ownership of that at the factory. So something else interesting to discuss
maybe with the factory is like, Hey, what does the bonus thing structure look like here? And like,
is quality, um, actually tied to, you know, how the engineers are getting paid or how the
production staff is getting paid.
And then, you know, just kind of understand what their process and system is for that. And like
what the incentives are for them to be as involved as possible and also just try to nurture that
relationship with them. So it's really important to find someone that can facilitate all of those
things for you.
If you're not working with someone that can do all of those, then, you know, you, you need to
continue doing due diligence and find a better partner. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, all right. So I think, I think this slide is good. This is just like a, it's just a very simple
evaluation process.

Um, so you, you do want, you know, when you're collecting samples like from, from various
suppliers, you know, for, for us, um, after we do the outreach, um, we typically present anywhere
from like three to five options. Sometimes we'll, we'll, we'll provide more options, but in those
cases, now you're going to want to like label your samples, you know, just so you know, who's
who, what's what, um, you know, we, we, we do like factory A, B, C, D as like kind of our naming,
uh, convention. Um, you know, you should, you know, have your own as well.
Um, and then you want to, you want to be testing the quality when you get these samples. Like,
you know, just, you just want to, you want to do all kinds of testing and you probably could just
like search, like, you know, based on like the product, like what are some different ways, uh, you
could test, test the products, like the samples. Um, you know, there's plenty of content out there
for you to, to figure out like a very simple, like DIY, uh, process.
Uh, we do have clients that have us, uh, test, um, and you know, there's definitely disclaimers,
um, we give them when they put it on us to do, but we have an office of like 20 plus people. Um,
so, uh, and then when it comes to like skincare, we have, we have like 20 women. So, uh, it's
pretty, pretty easy to get like good feedback there.
Um, and then you, you do want to have, like, you do want to compare results. You want to figure
out, um, we had, we had this one client who does an anti-aging serum and like, I think he did a
great job with like coming up with the categories he wanted to, uh, use for, for comparing I'd say
with, with skincare. Um, you know, I would say scent, texture are like probably the key ones, um,
you know, to be looking at effectiveness of course, but you know, that's a harder one to, to, to
really test.
Um, but you know, I mean, when it comes to like cosmetics, for example, I mean, that, that's an
easier one on, on effectiveness. Um, and then with, with electronics, um, there, there's a lot more
that you're probably going to want to test because you just want to you get an understanding of
like what the potential defects are going to be. Um, I would say utilizing the sourcing company,
uh, is helpful, uh, when it comes to due diligence, because one, we are doing this day in and day
out.
Um, we, we specialize in it. So we, we just know kind of like how to go through the process. I'd
say a fulfillment company that's um, not as much because like they're not, if they're doing, if
they're, if they're good at sourcing, it's just the simple sourcing stuff that you don't really need to
do much like testing of like quality and whatnot.
Um, and even then like, you know, they're not, they're not, they don't have a manufacturing
background. So they're not thinking about like the common procedures, you know, factories
would take, whereas like, you know, for a sourcing company, um, our whole team worked in, you
know, in factory sales or in procurement at factories. So like the kind of, they just know, um, then
you just want to organize your samples, you know, especially like if you're doing this yourself, like

you don't want to be just like sending, having a factory send you, uh, samples to your home.
Otherwise you're just going to be getting like, you know, probably 10 plus different shipments and
it's just messy. Um, you kind of want to get everything, you know, sent to one place and shipped
out together. That's probably just a more organized way to do it.
Um, and then, you know, you got like performance metrics to be looking at. Um, so you actually
just cover that, that last piece. Um, just like evaluating, uh, samples based on performance and
durability tests.
Yeah. So you're, when you're, when you're developing a product, whether it's skincare or a
gadget, you're going to have a vision for its performance in mind. And when you're evaluating
different factories and whether or not they're, they're hitting your vision, you know, you kind of
want to have like a baseline set up, whether it's an example of another product that already exists
or, you know, if it's just meeting the idea you have in your head and then evaluating from what the
sample you got, if it actually hits that criteria or not, or thinking about next steps, um, to get it
there.
Right. And especially with like durability with samples, it's a little bit tough unless it's like a product
that's already made because generally when you're doing like a gadget, like durability, like is, is,
is a non starter for like skincare and like supplements and things like that. Like you're not worried
about how durable your cream is or like a capsule is or something like that.
Right. But like, um, with a gadget, you know, you're going to be testing a hand sample unless it's
something that's just like off the shelf that's already made. And so it's kind of difficult to do
durability tests on, on certain samples.
Um, if you're getting something off the shelf that you're just thinking about putting like your, your
brand on it or something, then maybe, you know, put it, put it through a drop test or something. I
mean, I remember one time years ago I was developing this product and we had, we had a
sample. It was actually was a hand sample, but it was a CNC sample and not a 3d print one.
Um, and we dropped it down six flights of stairs, um, in the stairwell at the factory and it survived
the drop test. And so like, you know, get creative and have fun with it. Um, it doesn't always need
to be, you know, methodic, right.
But really put it through the ringer when you get the product to make sure that you're getting
something that you like. All right. All right.
Why don't you, uh, yeah, I think it's good segue, uh, right into like the testing solution. So I'll let
you kind of continue that one as well. Yeah.
So you're going to want to identify certain product defect scenarios for the manufacturer and see
how susceptible they are to them because at the end of the day, you're the one that understands

how the user is going to be using the product. Um, and the factory might also understand that
too. And so it's great to have a collaborative conversation and relationship with them about it and
see like, Hey, what type of defects have you seen? Like ask them what the craziest defect that
they've seen was and like how they ended up solving for it.
And then ask them what their plan is to make sure that that doesn't happen. Um, and, and your
product. And then if they don't really understand how the product is being used or what could
happen, like go ahead and play out a bunch of different scenarios for them.
Um, and just be patient about it and be as detailed and specific as possible. Uh, because
engineers kind of like to be really nitpicky and specific. Um, so I guess that kind of covers the
detailed solutions section of this as well.
Um, and then yeah, find proactive manufacturers. Like if you are talking with someone and then
one day they hit you up and say like, Oh, Hey, like we found out that this issue can happen. And
like, here's what we're doing about it.
Like that's a, that's a huge win. A lot of times manufacturers will run into issues and they'll either
try to cover it up. Um, or they'll put a bandaid solution on it, which isn't going to be something
permanent or necessarily reliable longterm.
Then you end up finding out about it and then you get into this like reactive cycle of trying to fix
things while you're selling it at the same time. So make sure that you have some sort of proactive
system in place with the manufacturers to identify solutions and address them quickly. Yeah.
And moving into the next slide for like outsourcing. So like time is like most valuable to, to any of
us. Uh, you know, especially when you're, when you're, you know, in, in this, uh, in this business,
especially with e-commerce, like, you know, like trying to reduce your customer acquisition costs,
um, and like really focusing on testing and, and, and figuring out how to get into a much lower,
um, tack, like that is going to save you more money than anything you do with trying to reduce
your costs and supply chain.
And, you know, the questions you really need to be like asking yourself is like, should you be
spending time, you know, working on like the backend, especially if you don't have much
experience with it and you have a lot more experience with the marketing side of the business,
which is, that's like the real core function and like having to build out a team, um, on that side,
because you don't want to be doing everything. Like I have some, some clients and friends that
do all the work, you know, a lot of, a lot of e-commerce businesses are running smaller teams
and, you know, you're basically just like slaving away working, you know, crazy hours on, on just
the marketing side. So, you know, I'd say like outsourcing it to, to specialists, um, you know,
really free up your time and, and that could be either, you know, using a sourcing company or just
building your own in-house team.

Like, you know, a lot, a lot of the eight figure brands, they start getting, uh, you know, and, and,
um, an ops person, like an ops manager. Um, well, unfortunately a lot of, or I'd say all of our
clients that have that position, like none of them have any China experience. So, um, but I mean,
an ops person is still like super important to have because they have to be very logical.
They have to understand, you know, the supply, like the supply chain and how it works at
different costs at each touch point, you know, under being able to have like a real breakdown of
like, um, these like hog categories. So you actually could figure out what areas you could reduce
costs. And, um, you know, if, if you're not a China specialist, it's kind of tough because, um, you
don't necessarily know the best way to like navigate it.
So like when you do have like a sourcing company and especially like with the way where, where,
um, explaining costs to people, like we're not just some company that just, you know, buys it for a
price and resells it to you. Like we give the breakdown because we know that like as you're
scaling, like for example, skincare, like it's not about saving money in bottles, you know, it's, it's
about like trying to save money in your material and processing costs. So understanding the real
breakdown really helps you start to think about like, what is the real like potential of like reducing
my price? Um, so I would say, uh, you know, time is huge.
Um, evaluation. Um, so I'd say just having a very good, um, sample evaluation process. Um, and
then that like just allows you to get to, you know, making like better decisions.
Um, and you know, with inspection, like you could definitely hire like third party inspection
companies. I mean, we even do it for our clients in some situations just because like, you know,
they, their, their background is in QC. So like their way of going about it is going to be a lot more
professional.
You're going to get the report. It could be expensive. Um, if you're having them do too much
inspecting, just like how with us, like if, if, if, if we're required, you know, to, to, to inspect every
little unit and it's like a very small order, like in those cases, um, you know, we, we explain to
them like different ways of going about it and like giving the factory more responsibilities so that
we're able to really, uh, generate the results that the client needs.
Um, and that requires having a good relationship with the factory to get them to do like the
additional work on, um, you know, helping us do like, whether it's like remote inspecting
sometimes because we're in Shenzhen, like, and, and it's a flight away, you can't just like go to
the factory that easily. Um, and then just like compliance, um, you know, we, we, we work with
the compliant with the compliance partner, especially for like skincare and supplements. Um, but
for, for, you know, guys that are doing this on their, on their own, like certainly make sure you're
working with a compliance consultant.
Uh, they, they're going to tell you kind of like, um, everything that you really need to know about,

um, the claims you're making, the labeling, uh, certain certifications you might want to consider
that will separate you from, from the others. So you really do want to have these like specialists
working with you and, and outsourcing them. You can't really just have an in-house team for all of
it.
Um, but, uh, yeah, I would say, you know, these are kind of the things to be, you know, thinking
about when it comes to like outsourcing stuff, um, in like on the backend with supply chain. All
right. What are some, uh, red flags, CJ or Chris of either of you? Yeah, I mean, look, I think that
with red flags where there's, where there's smoke, there's fire.
Right. I think that it's important to, when you're working with a manufacturer, see, are there any
indicators up front that could end up showing you that maybe this is not really the right supplier
for you to be working with in the longterm. And so you want to be looking at, like, you want to be
looking for vague answers about production processes, because that can, that, you know, that
can mean that there's not exactly transparency, which is what's so important if you're going to be
trusting them to be working on your products.
Right. So things to look out for slow responses, right. Do you have to follow up multiple times to
try to get simple answers? That could be, you know, that could mean that when serious problems
do occur, you're not able to quickly resolve them or get to the root cause of defects or other
failures.
Once you're in a mass production, you don't want vague assurances. You want complete and
total confidence and mastery from your manufacturer over all of the processes. You know, you
don't want to be running into issues with a prototype and they say, oh, you know, don't worry
about it.
We'll work it out later. You know, you need to understand how it's going to be worked out. You
don't want it to be, for example, where you invest tens of thousands of dollars in toolings to
manufacture, to mass manufacture your product only for there to have been an issue that you
could have avoided if you had addressed it, you know, proactively before the tooling process,
before spending tens of thousands of dollars.
Right. So I think that you really need to make sure that your manufacturer has a clear mastery
over the subject matter and that they are straightforward with you. In flexibility and problem
solving, you know, you want to always be working with a manufacturer that is cooperative
because, you know, that can mean the difference between, you know, getting a program out on
time before a major holiday like Chinese New Year.
It could mean getting production line allocations or potential cost reductions, subcontracted
manufacturer adjustments on short notice. Right. You want to make sure that your manufacturer
will cooperate with you because ultimately they're manufacturing your product with your brand,
with your name on it.

Finally, missing certifications. This can be a red flag showing that your manufacturer is not
actually experienced in working in your product category or that, you know, depending on what
your sales channel is, that you might not even be able to sell your product on that sales channel
without those certifications. Right.
So it's good to do that due diligence up front to make sure that you don't go too far down the
stream with a manufacturer that you ultimately won't even be able to use. Nice. All right.
So getting to just some key takeaways. So I'll do the first one, but yeah, contacting multiple
suppliers just for better negotiation results. I mean, the more suppliers you speak to, the more
data points you have, the more of a chance you're going to have to get a very professional
company.
You're also going to get a really good understanding of market prices and just like what things
cost and also just get an understanding too of just like how the lead times work. What I loved
when I was speaking to so many suppliers at once is like information I'd get from one supplier. I
would just like repackage that to another supplier to like really start playing around with them to
see like, you know, what the truth is, because sometimes like you're getting so much mixed
information.
You're trying to figure out like what, what the honest answer is. So I would say that's really a big
one. I'll let you, CJ, handle one of the other takeaways.
Yeah. So when it comes to verifying certifications, you know, when they send you certifications, it
might be from certain labs that you've never heard of. So the due diligence process doesn't stop
at the factories.
You might want to do some due diligence on the lab and they send you a certificate, look up the
lab, see what the lab is all about and see if they're reputable. We've seen situations where
factories or clients have come to us that have been dealing with factories themselves, had sent
us certifications with a lab that had a name that wasn't the actual factory that they were
purchasing from. So if you're actually able to, you know, contact the certifying company and ask
them like, hey, have you do any business with this factory or, you know, something along those
lines, just to kind of verify the legitimacy of the certificate that can go a really long way when
performing due diligence.
Awesome. Yeah. Number three here, evaluating capabilities for efficient production solutions.
You know, I think CJ actually touched on this one a lot. Strong engineering teams can enhance
product quality and designs. You want to make sure that the personnel that you're interacting
with, that they, you know, that they're really experts that you're interacting with, right? You want to
make sure they have experience in your product category, that it's a good product fit for their

capabilities and that they are suitable then to scale with you and maybe even expand on your
product line in the future.
You want them to be sharing with you what risks there may be in your design and in the
production plan so that you're proactively able to address these things so that you don't end up in
a tight spot later on. Yeah. And then when it comes to testing samples, finally, you want to talk to
the factory about what they're testing their products for, what the different steps are, what the
different specifications and standards are for them.
You can use this as kind of a stepping stone to add to it with your own experience and what you
know that the consumers are going to be doing with the product just to make it more robust and
use that to test the product to make sure that you're getting a product that is as reliable and
stable as could possibly be. Okay. Awesome.
Awesome. I think this was a great one. And, you know, I hope that, you know, this was like useful
for people, especially for ones that are like really trying to like figure this out on their own.
I think like this could be, you know, this could be a really good foundation for you in performing
due diligence with your supplier. So stay tuned. There's more modules to come.
And all right. Looking forward to the next one.



======================================================================
FILE: Q1 Q2 Product Launch Strategies - Evolve Supply Chain Program Ev.txt
======================================================================

Q1 Q2 Product Launch Strategies - Evolve Supply Chain Program
Ev
Alright guys, so for this module we're going to just go over Q1 and Q2 ecommerce supply chain
strategies. I know there's always discussions about prepping for Q4, but we do think that there's a
different set of things to always do each quarter, so I think this could be really helpful for the
community to just know what are the different things you could be doing in Q1 and Q2, even if
you're a seasonal business in Q4, what kind of things you could be doing during this time. So I'm
going to dive right in.
CJ, why don't you kind of give a brief overview of what are the common topics that we discuss
usually for stuff like this? Sure, so first we're going to discuss why Q1 and Q2 must be planned
together. That's usually because Chinese New Year falls in Q1 and sometimes lingers into Q2.
It's very early in Q1, depends on when it actually falls that year, so it's really important to match
those up together.
Then we're going to talk about how that can affect your supply chain disruption, your pre-CNY
planning, what you can expect for supplier communication and how you can reduce risk there,
how you can remain stable throughout Q1 to be able to sustain Q2 growth, what good strategies
are for Q2, how to adopt best quality control practices throughout Q1 and Q2, and then crossfunctional alignment to do Q2 launches, and when you really need to be thinking about product
development and how these supply chain disruptions are going to affect a launch that you want to
have in Q2. All right, so Q1 and Q2, like what Siju said at the beginning, they do have to be
planned together. You have Chinese New Year and almost pre-CNY when factories just start to
close two weeks before the actual holiday.
Material suppliers are definitely closing around then and then the assembly factories just start to
close even maybe as late as a week before. Part of why they also close earlier is because
everyone in manufacturing is going back to their hometown. They're either driving, taking the
train.
I remember when I was going to someone's hometown for Chinese New Year, it was two days
before, and we were in bumper-to-bumper traffic where it just didn't move to the point that you
had people selling cup of noodles on the street in traffic. It just becomes a total mess. Take
Shenzhen, for example, where a lot of people are manufacturing.
90% of that city is not from Shenzhen, so it's like a ghost town. Beijing is similar. When I lived
there my first five years, my first time, I was like, wow, the subway doesn't have any people there.
It's kind of weird considering there's 20 plus million people in the city. It's definitely an interesting
time. In addition, when Chinese New Year is over, a lot of the factories are operating at half the
capacity because some people are staying in their hometown a little bit longer, but a lot of it is

that people quit their jobs and they're looking for new ones because they look at it as a restart to
the year.
That creates challenges in itself as well because there's usually a rush of orders after CNY. It's a
very messy period once you're getting into the thick of Q1. Any experiences you have, CJ, related
to CNY? I'm living it right now.
I'm living in Shenzhen. It's normally a city of 20 million people. There are no cars on the streets.
There's barely any restaurants to eat at. I heard from a friend that something like 8 to 10 million
cars are leaving Guangdong province a day this week. A really strong portion of the population is
leaving.
Shenzhen is not the only city like this. Shenzhen is a big manufacturing hub, but in Guangdong
and the surrounding cities, it's all the same. Where this really affects the supply chain the most is
not so much that the factories are closed down.
You could always just have overtime. It's really not that difficult to get people in the assembly
shops. It's the raw material suppliers.
We're in a situation right now with a client where they're doing apparel, and two weeks ago
already, all of the cotton suppliers finished their orders and went home for the new year. That's an
obstacle that we're trying to navigate. Same thing with steel suppliers.
Right now, it's February 12th as we're recording this. Steel suppliers stopped selling steel before
the end of January, so it's already been over two weeks since we've been able to get any steel.
Then once they come back, sure, they'll all be back right after Chinese New Year is over around
February 25th this year, but then it takes two or three weeks to actually make stuff and get caught
up on the backlog.
You're in this lull where you're six to eight weeks out from getting any replenishment on supplies
for production. Another thing to keep in mind is port congestion during Chinese New Year. Just
like in Q4, shipping rates go up.
It becomes increasingly difficult to book containers, just like before Christmas. It's kind of like this
November to February rush where it's almost the same as Q4 when you're going into the Chinese
New Year period because it is the equivalent of their Christmas or their holiday season out here.
Things are a little bit more expensive, and it's important to make strategic decisions with that in
mind.
Make sure that you have your inventory planned out and prepared so that you don't have to worry
about going through any of these obstacles during Q1 and Q2. I'd say part of the planning, the
second point, is inventory, suppliers, and logistics decisions you're making in Q1 is going to
define your Q2 success. I almost just like kind of impacts the way you need to operate in Q2.

You do need to be thinking about what's my inventory situation right after they get out of Chinese
New Year, and then what am I going to need to order because there's going to be just such a
backlog leading up to Q2 that you're not really going to have things super regular and back to a
well-oiled machine until maybe a month into Q2. The congestion probably will be less as well and
more stabilized. You just need to be kind of hitting the reset button yourself, but what are really
the key things you want to take care of because you're also just not going to get the attention of
your suppliers that you usually get.
What I find the most interesting is, especially with Q4 heavy businesses, you have a really solid
Q4, you made a ton of revenue, and you want to kind of start slowing things down a little bit in Q1
and Q2, and so you don't anticipate this downtime properly, and then you end up running out of
stock. What happens is that you're playing catch-up for all of Q1 and Q2, and then all of a sudden
Q3 is upon you and you're trying to prepare for Q4 already, and then you missed out on
opportunities for more increased revenue that will allow you to invest in more product, invest in
more marketing, and have a better Q4 than you did the previous year. It's really this constant
cycle that you need to be constantly prepared for.
I think that segues nicely into this slide which is Q1 reality check supply chain disruptions. We
talked already about the actual factory shutdowns and how even though the official holiday might
be on one day because of all of the traffic and congestion, the actual celebration of the holiday
and then the actual closures may be for two weeks, three weeks, or more. Then even after that, it
takes the manufacturer's time to get back up and running as they wait for personnel to come
back.
They actually may have to lose staff for certain personnel that don't come back after the holiday.
Then as they're getting back, they also have to align their schedules with their like subcomponent
material suppliers. That can take even longer.
We talked there about some of the CNY factory shutdowns. That also leads to shipping
congestion as people rush on the way into Chinese New Year to get their shipments out. Then
immediately after Chinese New Year as well, they're trying to pre-book that space to get their
shipments out to try to get their materials ordered.
It ends up with a backlog, not just for material ordering, but for actually getting your goods picked
up and shipped. Production slowdowns and labor shortages. I think we also covered this pretty
well also because it's not just your product and having your factory open.
It's also making sure that the materials, the subcomponentry is all available and that there's
transportation of that material available from the material supplier over to your manufacturer.
There's a lot of dots to connect there and a lot of schedules to align. It definitely can lead to some
disruptions.

Then finally, one of the implications here that you can miss your launch windows without early
planning on this. We'll be a little bit more in-depth on this point throughout this presentation, but
it's absolutely essential that you're keeping Chinese New Year in mind. I think it's also important
to remember over the last couple of years, a lot of people have tried to expand their
manufacturing, diversify their supply chain, and start manufacturing outside of China.
I would say even if you're manufacturing outside of China, you most likely do still have
componentry that is coming from China. Then what that can result in is even more disruptions
because the materials that the Chinese suppliers are ordering, they then ship it to the destination
countries where their factory partners might be located or the ones that are where you're
manufacturing. The delays from CNY can result in those materials not arriving in time to maintain
your production line.
Then sometimes these manufacturers overseas like in, let's say, Vietnam or over in Malaysia or
other Southeast Asian countries, some of their personnel, like let's say some of their tooling
engineers, quality engineers, might actually be from China. They may be on holiday during this
period too. If you have to troubleshoot issues that occur, you might not actually have the same
level of support that you normally would even if you're outside of China and think you're not going
to be affected by CNY.
I would just urge caution on that. Okay. All right, cool.
Cedar, do we have any recent situations with clients that come to mind with regards to some of
the disruptions going on? I mean, there's a couple samples that didn't make the cutoff date to get
things shipped out. I think this year we were fairly buttoned up when it came to getting everyone
prepared and getting things out. I don't think there's any orders stuck on the floor anywhere, like
any pending things, other than clients coming to us with like, yesterday, and we're right in the
middle of Chinese New Year now, and they're saying like, hey, I need this ASAP, and we're like,
hey, sorry.
We started talking about this in December. Yeah, yeah. No, I definitely feel this year felt a lot
smoother overall.
Even with the hiccups that went on towards the end, they were like hiccups where there was still
some time to get it out, or like 90% of it, which kind of works out because based on the order
cycles, they don't necessarily need everything. So yeah, no, I think it definitely worked out more.
Yeah, I'd say the only frustrating thing is just the product development stuff, it gets really hard to
do it when you get closer because just factories don't really want to focus on figuring out product
designs and stuff.
They're like checked out already. So they'll just say like, yeah, let's just like push those
conversations to when we get back. But I would say, one thing that I've done religiously, since I

started like doing sourcing, I was always just asking for the schedule with any factory that I was
working with.
When I was doing e-commerce, I was working I think with like 15 plus different suppliers, whether
it was like accessories or vapes and just everyone had a different schedule. That's something
that's interesting. I kind of find it funny when clients are asking, what are they getting back? My
question's never so concrete because it really depends on which factory we're talking about,
especially because we have a lot of clients where we're not working with just one factory.
So I think knowing the schedule is really important because then it just allows you to be like, it
allows you to at least just like set it in your head. Like, hey, okay, for this product, like just not
going to even touch it until this date for this product, I'm going to do this. So it is really helpful for
getting yourself like, you know, it's more planned.
So why don't we walk in to the Q1 strategy? Chris, you want to take the floor with that one? Yeah,
sure. So like we had talked about, because of the disruptions that can occur surrounding Chinese
New Year, it's a good idea to go through this period with strategy in mind to set yourself up for
success in Q2 and later in the year. So first off, like Greg was mentioning, lock production
schedules before CNY.
Try to secure your production lines early so that your order doesn't get pushed behind other
brands during the pre-holiday rush. I would say this is the number one best advice that I would
give anybody. You know that you're up against constraints on the schedule side.
So the best thing you can do is communicate, get your orders in and emphasize the importance
and communicate with your supplier so that they know what your expectations are, and so that
you can hear their feedback about your plan as well. So I would say, yeah, this is definitely the
number one biggest advice that I would give to somebody going into the Chinese New Year
period. Even if it feels like you're limited in what you can achieve from a production perspective,
this communication, by doing this, you're absolutely taking the essential step and you're going to
be better off than other people that haven't had these discussions with their suppliers.
Number two, front-load critical SKUs. So produce your best sellers first so that your launch isn't
delayed by less important variants. You know, here this goes hand-in-hand with point number
three here.
Building buffered inventory for Q1 launches, carrying extra units to protect sales when factories
and shipping slow down after shutdowns. I think I have countless stories about this, but it's so
important to be projecting out how your demand is going to be throughout Q1 and Q2 and
focusing in your production on your main sales drivers. So as the factories shut down, they're
going to be trying to get those last orders in, and you'll be competing for production line capacity
in many instances.

And then as the factories come back, they might have to ramp back up on their capacity. So any
assumptions you have about how many units can be shipped out, you might need to adjust those
assumptions. So it's a good idea to be communicating with your supplier about what their rampup plan looks like post-CNY.
And I mean, to be completely frank, this period is so important, particularly if you're doing
business on Amazon, for example, where to prepare for Prime Day, you might be getting Prime
Day orders on that ramp-up. Especially if you're FBA, you might be getting orders in May, which
means you need to ship in April, which means you only have maybe a month and a half of
production at best in order to ramp yourself up for that demand from Amazon on one of the
biggest sales holidays of the year. So it's so important to be focusing in and planning out what
that demand looks like through Prime Day so that you don't set yourself up for failure later on
where you can't catch up with the demand.
You might have to rely then on more expensive shipping methods like air freight in bulk just to
catch up, which I know everyone wants to avoid. And then number four, you've got new product
development. Now for this, this is a good period where it is true that the factories are stepping out
during this period, but it is still so important to be communicating about what your product launch
plans are because any progress you can make during this period means that you've kind of got a
head start post-CNY and that you're already familiarizing your factory partners with what your
product launch plan is for the rest of the year.
CJ, maybe you have some additional commentary on this point, since I know you're right there in
Xinjiang. Yeah, so first off, before we get into the product development side of things, when
you're thinking about front-loading your critical SKUs and building buffers, there's a case of
supply and demand going on, and so some critical components prices might rise as well. So it
would behoove you to get those orders in earlier before you're just at a race to the top when it
comes to pricing.
We're seeing things like batteries are getting crazy expensive right now, and it's causing some
delays for some of our clients coming out of the new year, and it's just something that they have
to accept. So it's really important to just make sure that you're prepared and have all the inventory
you need, otherwise you're just kind of cutting into your margins as well as just going through
unnecessary stress. When it comes to new product development, Greg, you mentioned it earlier,
too, with a lot of the factories, like the engineering team or the R&D staff, they're maybe not
available during Chinese New Year or even beforehand.
They're kind of throwing their hands in the air. The engineers kind of start to work a little bit
slower because they're just excited to go home, and they want to go home with a clean slate and
not have all these pending projects going on. So all that being said, though, during this Chinese
New Year time when you're not so caught up in supply chain mess, hopefully you've done
everything you needed to do to prepare for it, and so you should have some free time to kind of

think about things.
So it's a great time to reflect on the last year, see what sold well, understand what customer
feedback was, and really start thinking about what new products you can launch for the back half
of the current year, and just kind of get your roadmap together and just make sure that you're
planned for coming out of the Chinese New Year strong. You're going to your suppliers with
ideas, new products, that also help with negotiations, right? If you're going to them and saying,
hey, we have all these new products, and here's our forecast going into the rest of the year, and
then here's what we're going to do with the new products in Q4. Being set up in that type of way
is really setting yourself up for success at the back end of the year.
If you come out of Chinese New Year in mid to late Q1 with Q2 around the corner, you can get
products done by Q3 and launch them in Q4. And so your Q4, which is going to be your biggest
season for most people, is a big reflection of the preparation that you're doing now. So take
advantage of the downtime during Chinese New Year and do some product development.
Yeah, 100%. 100%. I think anytime a client talks about wanting to do an ODM project, like a
custom gadget, I'm like, strap in because it is going to be a long time.
But yeah, there's so much planning with it and so many decisions that have to get made. And I
would say, if you do have a good industrial design engineer, this probably is a great time, if you're
thinking about starting right now, to just knock out those designs and try to just be more clear with
exactly the features of everything that you want with the product. And that way, when you go into
it with the supplier when they get back, you just know exactly what you're looking for, what the
trade-offs are.
Of course, when it comes to creating a new product, there's always going to be trade-offs,
because there's those unexpected costs that you're not going to be thinking about. So it's good to
have plan A, plan B, plan C, and just really think it through, because you have all the time in the
world right now to do it, since time is kind of frozen. All right, let's go into supplier communication
and risk reduction.
Yeah, from my previous experiences, especially because you've been at companies where you're
working with contract manufacturers that are producing for really large companies. So Q1, you
know that there's a million things to already do. But why don't you kind of go into communication
and risk reduction? Yeah, I mean, I think that the first line item here is absolutely a really
important one.
Early forecast sharing with your suppliers. Giving your factory demand visibility is going to help
them to reserve labor and materials before schedules tighten. It's so important that your
manufacturer knows what your expectations are, and that you can align with them in advance.
It's going to give you the leg up on any of your competitors who are trying to get space on their

production line, and it's going to help you to truly understand whether or not you're going to be
able to meet your demand with their labor and capacity allocations during the period. So yeah,
absolutely make sure you share your forecast. Something that I would urge, however, is that it's
good to share your forecast, but it's also extremely important that if the trigger that's necessary for
your manufacturer to be placing their material orders is your own purchase orders to them, make
sure that you're getting your POs issued to them and that you're very clear that you want to make
sure materials are being ordered during this pre-CNY period.
So I would say make sure that you have very clear communication with them about those
material orders, and if they require a PO from you, I would definitely recommend placing those
POs pre-CNY so that you can secure the raw materials. That way, these orders from your
supplier are already in with the factory, and hopefully they've placed those to the material
suppliers already. So I would say those two points are extremely important.
The third point here is identifying alternate factories or backup plants. This is so important for just
business in general in product development and manufacturing. Always have contingency plans.
You can be as prepared as you want, but if you don't have a backup plan with your supplier, you
can be setting yourself up for failure. I think this is where it's definitely helpful to be working with.
It's one of the leverage you can get by working with a sourcing company, for example, who tends
to be able to nurture relationships more quickly with alternate suppliers and provide these backup
plans just in case you need it.
For example, let's say you're working with a manufacturer. This has been happening to me just
recently even, where because of the Chinese New Year shutdown, all of our materials for a
production build are on track and okay to support our production line outside of China during
CNY. However, because we changed the packaging method, we ended up in a supply crunch
where if we had an alternate packaging supplier lined up and ready to supply, we would have
been able to finish a production build.
So even the critical component, just being packaging, is kind of frustrating because you think that
it's so easy to provide. But if you don't have those backup solutions in mind already, you can be
setting yourself up for disruption. And then the final point here, like Greg was touching on also a
few minutes ago, document the lead times and shut down calendars.
Each manufacturer can have their own timelines and their sub-suppliers can too. So it's important
to over-communicate about what those timelines look like in advance. Greg, CJ, I don't know if
you have any other points on this area.
Yeah, I think a lot of stuff is just being reiterated here just because of the importance that it has.
When it comes to document lead times, I think that's something we try to do is just be as
proactive as possible, as early as possible, telling our clients, like, hey, here's when your factories
are shutting down. Here's what your production schedule looks like.

Here's when they're going to get back. Let's hop on the phone and figure out a forecast for you,
right? And so we're in a situation now where we're lucky to have a lot of our clients that have
production already pre-booked going into next year. And they have shipments scheduled already
all the way through March, some even as far out as April.
And so the people that are able to be proactive and plan and forecast, as we just talked about,
are some of the more successful operators that we deal with, I would say, for sure. Yeah, I would
say for the Q4 businesses, Q1 is a great time to reflect on the previous year and really think
about what your forecast and growth is looking like for this year so that you could start figuring
out with the manufacturer, like a production plan, but also like payment terms. I mean, because
it's almost like you want to give them what the year's quantity is going to be, and the supplier
already knows that it's going to be mostly in Q4, but it's like you just want to reverse engineer how
the lead times are going to look, how are we able to shorten it heading into Q4, and then what
kind of payment terms are you able to give me so I could continue to grow, collecting BOM costs.
So if you're dealing in a product category where it's not just one factory you have to order from,
you kind of have to allocate it to multiple factories, you could just start taking those BOM costs
from each of them and kind of leveraging the info you have against each other. And it's a great
time to negotiate because once you get into, I'd say, halfway into Q2, you're already starting, the
orders are already starting to pick up and now it's almost like they're like, there's nothing that you
really can do except for continue to order right now. So it's kind of like the factory kind of goes
like, haha, you had your chance but you didn't take care of it then because now you're going to be
entering your busy season.
So I do think that Q1 is a great time. I mean, January is probably better to do it than right at
Chinese New Year because no one really wants to talk business like that during Chinese New
Year. You got to wait until they get back and they're at more of a normal speed because factories
are scrambling to hire workers, so now you're kind of having these conversations in March.
And when it comes to negotiating, negotiating doesn't just happen in a week. Sometimes there's
a lot of back and forth for like a month. So the clock is a little bit short.
It's shorter than you think when you get back from Chinese New Year to try to get things figured
out. And again, I am speaking a little bit more about larger volume businesses because if you're
on the lower volume side, you still are able to get volume tier discounts and things like that. So
you're not really going to be struggling to negotiate.
But if you're a pretty large business, like if you're doing 50 million a year in revenue, you're
probably getting bottom pricing already. So now it's like you really have to pick at very specific
things and be a little bit more clever in the way that you negotiate. That's just my comment about
more of the seasonal Q4 businesses.

But we could dive into Q1 stability and then getting into Q2 growth. And we could kind of talk
about, we could touch on maybe a little product development. But yes, CJ, do you want to kind of
take the floor on this one? Yeah.
So if you're prepared in Q1 and you don't have to deal with any stock outs or you're not putting
out any fires in the supply chain, then you have a really good idea of what's going to work for you
this year and what your direction looks like. So it enables you to scale into Q2 more confidently. It
helps you develop stronger relationships with your supplier, Greg, like you were just saying.
They really appreciate you being proactive with your ordering and with your planning so that they
can not be stressed out going into the holiday. They can come back knowing that they have
business to get to right away. And then that can also help you with negotiations long term.
Also, if you're developing products in Q1 and you're coming out of Chinese New Year with new
products to work on in Q2, that's going to make everyone really happy as well. And so bridging
that gap between Q4, getting ready for Q1 with preparing your inventory, and then coming into
Q2 strong with new orders, new products. You're getting deals done.
It's really just the best way to continue to grow stably throughout the year. What do you think,
Chris? Yeah, I mean, I think that going out of Q1, you really want to make sure that you are
mindful about your production allocation. So having these Q1 reads, trying to make sure that
you're keeping your SKUs in stock at your warehouse so that you can support demand.
The last thing you want to do is go into Q2 where you had disruption in your ability to support
your demand. Because then you have to turn off ads. You don't necessarily get a good read for
what's working and what's not.
And so it could be a really painful process trying to ramp up there and get a new read on these
things during a period where, again, Prime Day orders are going to be coming through to you in
May. And Amazon's algorithms, they're going to be looking back at your performance in the
previous 90 days. It's just not ideal if you're facing disruptions in your marketing during that
period.
So you have to be really mindful about keeping your SKUs in stock so that you can scale up on
what's really working in Q2. Okay. Yeah.
So that's a good segue into just like your Q2 strategy, right? So for some businesses that kind of
got things figured out for Q1, which means they were already planning that towards the end of the
previous year, this is where you're thinking about if you've already launched something increasing
your order volume just based on some of the Q1 signals, like what I was saying before, especially
for the Q4 heavy businesses, just negotiating better MOPs and pricing, then there's a lot of
optimization you could do with production runs to just either reduce your per unit costs or trying to
figure out just better lead times. Now, there are businesses that maybe are planning a little bit

later and trying to just launch products in Q2 versus Q1. And for those, you're just trying to see
what kind of testing you can do.
I would say it's always best to kind of know the products you want to launch. It's like Q4 to just at
least have the ideas down. Q1 to kind of see what's really doable and knowing the timelines.
I think it requires a lot of time for you to be spending on the marketing side, actually, and just
thinking about different bundle options you could be doing, all kinds of offers you can be doing. I'd
say that's kind of the mindset you're going to be in. And then just the other two topics, and I'll let
you guys take over, but it's lead time and cost optimization and the supplier and sub-vendor
management.
CJ, what are the common things that we typically experience with just lead time and cost
optimization for Q2? Yeah. So going into Q2, if you're trying to get your cost and lead times
figured out, it all depends on what you were able to do in Q1 again, because you're going to need
to have some money to play with, basically. You're going to need to be able to go to your factory
and get your pre-ordered materials in.
You're going to need to be organized with your forecast and scheduling. And it's really hard to go
into Q2 swinging without being ready for that end of March wave of sales for after Chinese New
Year. And like Chris was saying, if you are doing Amazon Prime Day, you need to get the stuff on
a boat in April, which means that a lot of what you're going to need to be selling in Q2 probably
needs to get produced in Q1 and then shipped out.
And so just kind of keep that in mind. Don't just think like, oh, we're going to have a killer Q2, but
you don't need to think about it until then. I know we've reached out to a lot of clients recently and
said, hey, now it's Chinese New Year.
Let's get some product development stuff figured out. Let's see what your forecasts are like so
that we can come out swinging of Chinese New Year. And they're saying, oh, I'm not worried
about products until Q2.
I've launched this plan, but it's going to be in Q2. And I'm like, okay, cool, but we need to know
that now so that we're ready to go. Because I don't want to hear in April, like, oh, I wanted to
launch this in two weeks.
That's just not how that works. Yeah. And I think what I usually see with brands is like Q3, it
already starts to get pretty busy for the most part, just because people already figured out the
products that they're going to sell.
They've run a lot of the tests. They are starting to, especially for the new products that they've
moved into or new hero SKUs, they see how much that they could probably scale it. I think for
Q2, if you really want to know what's the shortest lead time you can do, because then you're able

to do a lot better cash flow planning for Q3 and especially Q4.
So I think to be more specific about the lead times, if you're dealing with gadgets, which
components take the longest to produce? If you're dealing with skincare and supplements, and
you're not doing that sticker wrap around the bottle, you're doing direct printing, like just
understanding how much you really need to be ordering to shorten the lead times on bottles.
Certain ingredients, especially if you're producing in China, for skincare, if you're doing an antiaging serum, there's certain ingredients that are made in France. If you're doing hair care, biotin
is commonly coming out of Germany.
So you just want to make sure that you know about longest lead time materials so that you are
able to get into a more stabilized lead time for assembly. I think also just thinking about your
shipping setup, your fulfillment setup, is pretty important just because if you're trying to just
optimize on the lead times where shipping is involved, you got to start thinking about, okay, if I'm
going to be doing hybrid fulfillment this year, because I wasn't last year, because that's going to
reduce my shipping costs, that means I am now going to have stuff on the water for 30 days.
What could I do to be on a better shipping schedule? Or let's say you have multiple brands and
you want to try to bring your shipping costs down.
Can I just put for two different brands that I own both my orders to fill up a 40-foot high cube
container? I do think thinking about your fulfillment setup, thinking about your shipment schedule,
what methods of shipping you're going to do to just have things on the fastest schedule possible,
I think is pretty important. I think in Q2 as well, you're seeing more stabilized sea freight prices, air
freight prices. It's going to be a little bit less wonky.
So you're able to get into just a better rhythm for shipping cost or your shipping cost forecast
planning. So I'd say these are the things you want to think about. Lastly, just on lead time, you
would think that box packaging is super fast, but that's only when it's automatically produced, like
the boxes that a skincare bottle would go into.
But if you're dealing with more of these semi-automatic produced boxes where it's mostly what
gadgets are going into, if you're ordering 100,000 units, those lead times are pretty long. So just
understanding, especially if you're going to be changing your designs and stuff or improving the
branding, just making sure you're well aware of the lead times if you're scaling up into certain
volumes. That way you don't want to be... The worst thing would... And I remember with this
feminine care brand we work with, to be waiting on packaging is probably the most frustrating
experience.
So I would say it's something to be thinking about. Chris, you could wrap it up on the sub-vendor
management part. Yeah.
I think that as you're going out of Q1 and heading out of Chinese New Year, it's good to be
evaluating your supplier performance. You want to be monitoring, are they delivering product on

time? Are they executing with a consistent level of quality? Have there been any challenges from
a supply chain perspective throughout Q1 and leading into Chinese New Year? Look at the prior
year performance, if applicable as well, because you want to make sure that if you want to start
introducing alternate sources, backup sources, or even on the sub-component level where let's
say you want a new packaging supplier or anything like that, that you're starting to connect those
dots and reach out to those alternate suppliers and backup options right after Chinese New Year
to set yourself up for a better second half of the year. Because you definitely don't want to be
doing that going into Q3 and then Q4 peak season.
One last point on all of this that I would mention is try to also think big picture when you're
thinking about your shipping methods and stocking up during this post-CNY period, because
you've got some really big holidays in Q2. Depending on what your product is, you've got Easter,
you've got Mother's Day, you've got Father's Day, there's Prime Day. So just keep in mind your
all-in costs, including your customer acquisition costs, because you might be missing out on
opportunities by not having inventory available.
I would definitely keep that in mind as well. Why don't you continue with this quality control as a
Q1-Q3 line? Our business jargon. Joking aside, quality control is incredibly important all times of
year, but going into the Chinese New Year period and immediately after, you want to make sure
that you're going into the rest of the year where you want to be scaling up with peace of mind.
You don't want to have questions in your mind about your manufacturer's ability to consistently
deliver a reliable product off the line. You don't want to be troubleshooting that as you're trying to
scale, because that's going to cause serious disruptions on your production line. You can add to
product cost if you have to start changing your processes to add in more cycle time for quality
steps in your production.
So you really want to make sure that you're preventing those defects before you're launching a
product. You want to make sure that you're reducing defect rates so you can scale confidently.
You want to make sure also, if you're not doing this already, that you're tracking recurring issues.
It's so important to make sure that not only are you writing down what are the issues, what are
the failure rates. Your manufacturers should be tracking this and providing you with a report on
this for every production line. You want to make sure that you're getting to the root cause for any
failures and that any of these failures that are occurring, when you understand what the root
cause is, that there's an effective corrective action plan.
Again, this last point here, tying QC failures to chargebacks and corrective actions. It's not just
about identifying the problem, although that is extremely important, getting to that root cause. You
also need to make sure that you have a clear actionable plan to be able to deliver the resolution
to the issues.

CJ, do you want to run through a client example with gadgets or skincare? Supply chain, like
subvendors and raw materials supply chain, can kind of change in Q1 and Q2 based on what
happens during Chinese New Year. A lot of businesses close or reopen, or factories will switch
subvendors, or you're dealing with new personnel. There's a lot of different variables that's
important to pay attention to.
Those types of questions are good questions to ask when you're thinking about quality during this
period of time. Are we using the same quality manager? Are all of our raw material suppliers the
same? They've changed. Have you done audits? Can you provide me with any types of audits
that you've done on them? And just really understanding if there are any variables, and then what
tests are being done to mitigate any risk during this period, because it can be a bit risky.
Yeah. I think also, especially when it comes to gadgets, there's a lot of troubleshooting that goes
on, especially if your defect rates are higher. So really trying to think through some of those
feature issues or connection issues when you're dealing with more high-powered stuff.
I think working on just reducing the defect rate is a really important time. Because one thing that
people don't think about a lot is what happens to your customer service team if your defect rates
are high. People don't really factor that into what your COGS are, because it's kind of hard to tie it
to your per unit cost.
But working on reducing your defect rate to as low as possible is pretty important, especially if
you're going to be scaling more aggressively in Q3 and Q4. It's a significant amount of profit that
you could be earning if you keep the defect rates low. So I'd say just really having a good tracking
system for the the defects that you're getting.
We tell our clients to send us a spreadsheet, and we give them topics that we need them to put in
for each of the columns, just so that we're able to communicate more effectively with the
manufacturer on what issues to solve. How many of those issues could actually just be solved by
quick changes? Is it a design flaw? That's why there's a defect rate, which means you would have
to come out with a version two. That's why you want to figure this out earlier in Q1 versus Q2,
because at least you'll still have time for launching a new version that same year.
Whereas if you're in Q2, you're cutting it pretty close to launch by Black Friday. So I'd say,
especially when it comes to gadgets, I'd say this is where you really do need to be thinking more
critically. When you're dealing with things like skincare and supplements, that's not as seasonal.
Reformulating or just doing product development in that space, it's just so much faster. Or if
you're dealing in fashion, again, you don't need to do tooling or anything like that. It is important to
work through product launches in that space during Q1 and Q2, just because factories can't really
scale up their capacity.
Usually in apparel, you're actually working on scaling factories. If we're going to be talking about

apparel, I would say really understanding your forecast and then what you want to come out with,
and trying to really dial in on the sizing issues, because returns and defects are quite high in
apparel. I just wanted to give more product category-specific examples.
All right, let's dive into the cross-functional alignment for Q2 launches. Chris, do you want to take
the floor? Yeah, sure. This is super important.
I think that we already talked a lot about on the supply chain side, but communication with the
manufacturer and talking about your forecasting with them. But outside of your external
communications, it's really important that your internal team is all aligned as well, because there
can be real implications for your overall planning going through this Q1, Q2 period, where if
you're not aligned, there could be serious gaps in your strategy. So the first line item here,
marketing aligned with real inventory availability.
If you are running ads on a product and it starts performing really, really well, and you run out of
stock, then you're in a really difficult spot because you're going to have to shut off your ads or
you're wasting money. Then you are not able to continue to refine and optimize your targeting for
that ad that you've been spending on. You could be really missing out on a much more attractive
run with that attractive ROAS.
That's something that's really challenging. Then going through the CNY period, if you haven't
been ordering the correct SKU balance between your different products, if you're offering multiple
products, that can be a real challenge, where suddenly you're investing in product, you're putting
in the factory's capacity on a SKU that might not be performing as well as a different one. So
aligning with your marketing team, making sure that those dollars spent are as valuable as
possible in acquiring your clients.
Number two here, sales forecasts synced with production capacity. On this, it really goes hand in
hand with this. You want to make sure that if your sales team is reviewing inventory levels, that
they have a good forward forecast during this period that can be challenging from a supply chain
perspective, so that they know what they need to be focusing on selling, so that they know what
the inventory flow looks like, despite some of these potential prospective supply chain disruptions
that can occur surrounding CNY.
Number three, this is something that Greg mentioned, make sure that customer service is
prepared for volume increases as you're scaling up here in this period post CNY. In trying to drive
some volume, you want to make sure that you have your team aware of what are you, what's
your SKU balance going to look like, what are you going to be selling, what will there be more
orders for, because if your team is used to a certain percentage of customer tickets surrounding a
product and your volume increases, then that percentage means you're going to be getting a lot
more orders, so you have to make sure a lot more tickets potentially, so you need to make sure
that they're briefed and that they're up to speed. If you actually have, let's say you're ramping up

with new CS customer service personnel, you want to make sure that they're familiar with your
product and familiar with any of the open, recurring type of issues that might be arising on
customer tickets.
And then finally here, all of this is going to result in fewer broken promises to customers, right? I
think that between any QC concerns that you're trying to tackle or between potential out of stocks
resulting in longer delivery times to customers, I think that within a lot of companies, one of the
most easily avoidable customer service tickets and also one of the most urgent ones, right? It's
easily avoidable, but also so important is where is my order, when am I getting it, right? So if
you're running out of stock on a key SKU and it's taking longer than usual to deliver to customers,
there could be a lot of crisis management, hands-on attention needed to keep those customers
happy and to make sure that you're keeping that sale without a charge back from the customer.
Yeah, true. It's just important to be aligned internally as you are externally, right? Make sure that
everyone on the team understands what's realistic.
After all of the preparation you've done with your supply chain, make sure that the entire team is
aware of what's actually going to happen and make sure that all the expectations are clear. Yeah,
right, right. So what are the key takeaways? All right, so just be mindful of how Chinese New
Year supply chains can disrupt Q1 and Q2.
We've said it many times over the duration of this module, but coming out of a successful Q4 and
preparing for a successful Q1 and Q2 is just going to give you an even better Q4 the following
year. Even if you're only a Q4-heavy business, you still want to make sure that you're good to go
in Q1 and Q2 and that you're doing everything you can to work around the Chinese New Year
challenges that are in front of you. That includes communicating with your suppliers early, making
sure that you have capacity allocated for you, that all of your QC is buttoned up, and that also
means taking advantage of the downtime to be able to get into product development so that you
have new things to sell in Q4 and particularly in Q3 because that can be a slower season.
There aren't as many holidays, people aren't spending as much because they're getting ready for
the Q4 holiday season, and so if you have a new product launch that can really boost your sales
in Q3 and Q1 and Q2 is the perfect time to start thinking about that. Right, right, all right. Well,
yeah, I think this was a really good session and module and I just hope this will be useful for
everybody and we'll dive into the next module shortly.



======================================================================
FILE: Why you MUST know your numbers with new offers - Origins Program _Start Here.txt
======================================================================

---
title: "Why you MUST know your numbers with new offers - Origins Program (Start Here)"
source: "https://www.skool.com/origins/classroom/03b8079b?md=8352bb41b5e04e1088e2ed9f80c30c46"
author:
published:
created: 2026-06-15
description: "This video was originally planned to go through all of the offers...  However, I have split this into two parts, so please make sure you watch the second part a"
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
Why you MUST know your numbers with new offers

16:31

This video was originally planned to go through all of the offers...

However, I have split this into two parts, so please make sure you watch the second part as well.

**The Origins Offers Document:**  
[https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/12HlY41TgffCVMKKXyRRzwyquHXEgNBpB7pEKY0cp80g/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/12HlY41TgffCVMKKXyRRzwyquHXEgNBpB7pEKY0cp80g/edit?usp=sharing "https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/12HlY41TgffCVMKKXyRRzwyquHXEgNBpB7pEKY0cp80g/edit?usp=sharing")  
  
**Link To Calculator:**  
[https://ecombusiness.com/profit-calculator](https://ecombusiness.com/profit-calculator "https://ecombusiness.com/profit-calculator")  
  
**REMINDER**  
***That calculator can be glitchy. So if you're having issues, make sure you just remove the numbers and type them back in. And if you have any spaces that are empty, make sure you put a zero.*** ***If you message me saying the calculator is broken, I will tell you to come back and watch the video again.***  

<audio><source type="audio/mpeg"></audio>

<audio><source type="audio/mpeg"></audio>