

======================================================================
FILE: Background - Confessions-of-an-Advertising-Man-by-Ogilvy-David-Parker-Alan-z-lib.org.txt
======================================================================

David Ogilvy

C o n f e ssi o n s o f
a n A d v e r t i si n g M a n

Background ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2
I How to Manage an Advertising Agency........................................................................................................................ 3
II How to Get Clients ........................................................................................................................................................ 7
III How to Keep Clients .................................................................................................................................................. 15
IV How to Be a Good Client ........................................................................................................................................... 19
V How to Build Great Campaigns ................................................................................................................................. 23
VI How to Write Potent Copy ........................................................................................................................................ 27
VII How to Illustrate Advertisements and Posters....................................................................................................... 30
VIII How to Make Good Television Commercials ....................................................................................................... 33
IX How to Make Good Campaigns for Food Products, Tourist Destinations and Proprietary Medicines.............. 35
X How to Rise to the Top of the Tree (Advice to the Young) ...................................................................................... 37
XI Should Advertising Be Abolished? ........................................................................................................................... 39

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man

Background

As A CHILD I lived in Lewis Carroll’s house in Guildford. My
father, whom I adored, was a Gaelic-speaking highlander, a classical
scholar, and a bigoted agnostic. One day he discovered that I had
started going to church secretly.
“My dear old son, how can you swallow that mumbo-jumbo? It
is all very well for servants, but not for educated people. You don’t
have to be a Christian to behave like a gentleman!”
My mother was a beautiful and eccentric Irishwoman. She disinherited me, on the ground that I was likely to acquire more money
than was good for me, without any help from her. I could not disagree.
At the age of nine I was sent to board at an aristocratic Dotheboys Hall in Eastbourne. The headmaster wrote of me, “He has a
distinctly original mind, inclined to argue with his teachers and to try
and convince them that he is right and the books are wrong; but this
perhaps is further proof of his originality.” When I suggested that
Napoleon might have been a Dutchman because his brother was
King of Holland, the headmaster’s wife sent me to bed without supper. When she was robbing me for the part of the Abbess in The
Comedy of Errors, I rehearsed my opening speech with an emphasis
that she disliked; whereupon she seized me by the cheek and threw
me to the floor.
At the age of thirteen I went to Fettes, a Scottish school whose
Spartan disciplines had been established by my great-uncle Lord Justice General Inglis, the greatest Scottish advocate of all time. My
friends at this splendid school included Ian Macleod, Niall Macpherson, Knox Cunningham, and several other future Members of Parliament. Chief among the masters I remember Henry Havergal, who
inspired me to play the double bass, and Walter Sellar, who wrote
1066 and All That while teaching me history.
I made a botch of Oxford. Keith Feiling, the historian, had
given me a scholarship at Christ Church, and I was the recipient of

Ipswich, Massachusetts

much kindness from Patrick Gordon-Walker, Roy Harrod, A. S.
Russell, and other dons. But I was too preoccupied to do any work,
and was duly expelled.
That was in 1931, the bottom of the depression. For the next
seventeen years, while my friends were establishing themselves as
doctors, lawyers, civil servants, and politicians, I adventured about
the world, uncertain of purpose. I was a chef in Paris, a door-to-door
salesman, a social worker in the Edinburgh slums, an associate of
Dr. Gallup in research for the motion picture industry, an assistant to
Sir William Stephenson in British Security Co-ordination, and a
farmer in Pennsylvania.
My boyhood hero had been Lloyd George, and I had expected
to become Prime Minister when I grew up. Instead, I finally became
an advertising agent on Madison Avenue; the revenues of my nineteen clients are now greater than the revenue of Her Majesty’s Government.
Max Beerbohm once told S. N. Behrman, “If I was endowed
with wealth I should start a great advertising campaign in all the
principal newspapers. The advertisements would consist of one short
sentence, printed in huge block letters—a sentence that I once heard
spoken by a husband to a wife: ‘My dear, nothing in this world is
worth buying.’”
My position is the opposite. I want to buy almost everything I
see advertised. My father used to say of a product that it was “very
well spoken of in the advertisements.” I spend my life speaking well
of products in advertisements; I hope that you get as much pleasure
out of buying them as I get out of advertising them.
By writing this book in the old-fashioned first person singular, I
have committed an offense against a convention of contemporary
American manners. But I think it artificial to write we when I am
confessing my sins and describing my adventures.

DAVID OGILVY

2

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man

I
How to Manage
an Advertising Agency

MANAGING an advertising agency is like managing any other
creative organization—a research laboratory, a magazine, an architect’s office, a great kitchen.
Thirty years ago I was a chef at the Hotel Majestic in Paris.
Henri Soule of the Pavilion tells me that it was probably the best
kitchen there has ever been.
There were thirty-seven chefs in our brigade. We worked like
dervishes, sixty-three hours a week—there was no trade union. From
morning to night we sweated and shouted and cursed and cooked.
Every man jack was inspired by one ambition: to cook better than
any chef had ever cooked before. Our esprit de corps would have
done credit to the Marines.
I have always believed that if I could understand how Monsieur
Pitard, the head chef, inspired such white-hot morale, I could apply
the same kind of leadership to the management of my advertising
agency.
To begin with, he was the best cook in the whole brigade, and
we knew it. He had to spend most of his time at his desk, planning
menus, scrutinizing bills, and ordering supplies, but once a week he
would emerge from his glass-walled office in the middle of the
kitchen and actually cook something. A crowd of us always gathered
around to watch, spellbound by his virtuosity. It was inspiring to
work for a supreme master.
(Following Chef Pitard’s example, I still write occasional advertisements myself, to remind my brigade of copywriters that my hand
has not lost its cunning.)
M. Pitard ruled with a rod of iron, and we were terrified of him.
There he sat in his glass cage, the gros bonnet, the arch symbol of
authority. Whenever I made a mistake in my work, I would look up
to see if his gimlet eye had noticed it.
Cooks, like copywriters, work under ferocious pressures, and
are apt to be quarrelsome. I doubt whether a more easygoing boss
could have prevented our rivalries from breaking into violence. M.
Bourgignon, our chef saucier, told me that by the time a cook is
forty, he is either dead or crazy. I understood what he meant the
night our chef potagier threw forty-seven raw eggs across the
kitchen at my head, scoring nine direct hits; his patience had been
exhausted by my raids on his stock pot in search of bones for the
poodles of an important client.
Our chef patissier was equally eccentric. Every night he left the
kitchen with a chicken concealed in the crown of his Hom-burg hat.
When he went on vacation he made me stuff two dozen peaches into
the legs of his long underwear. But when the

King and Queen of England were given a state dinner at Versailles, this roguish genius was chosen from all the pdtissiers in
France to prepare the ornamental baskets of sugar and the petits
fours glaces.
M. Pitard praised very seldom, but when he did, we were exalted to the skies. When the President of France came to a banquet at
the Majestic, the atmosphere in our kitchen was electric. On one of
these memorable occasions, I was covering frogs’ legs with a white
chaud-froid sauce, decorating each little thigh with an ornate leaf of
chervil. Suddenly I became aware that M. Pitard was standing beside
me, watching. I was so frightened that my knees knocked together
and my hands trembled. He took the pencil from his starched toque
and waved it in the air, his signal for the whole brigade to gather.
Then he pointed at my frogs’ legs and said, very slowly and very
quietly, “That’s how to do it.” I was his slave for life.
(Today I praise my staff as rarely as Pitard praised his chefs, in
the hope that they too will appreciate it more than a steady gush of
appreciation.)
M. Pitard gave us all a great sense of occasion. One evening
when I had prepared a Souffle Rothschild (with three liqueurs) he
took me upstairs to the door of the dining room and allowed me to
watch President Paul Doumer eat it. Three weeks later, on May 7,
1932, Doumer was dead. ∗
(I find that people who work in my agency get a similar charge
out of state occasions. When a crisis keeps them working all night,
their morale is high for weeks afterward.)
M. Pitard did not tolerate incompetence. He knew that it is demoralizing for professionals to work alongside incompetent amateurs. I saw him fire three pastry-cooks in a month for the same
crime: they could not make the caps on their brioches rise evenly.
Mr. Gladstone would have applauded such ruthlessness; he held that
the “first essential for a Prime Minister is to be a good butcher.”
M. Pitard taught me exorbitant standards of service. For example, he once heard me tell a waiter that we were fresh out of the plat
du jour—and almost fired me for it. In a great kitchen, he said, one
must always honor what one has promised on the menu. I pointed
out that the dish in question would take so long to cook that no client
would wait for a new batch to be prepared. Was it our famous coulibiac de saumon, a complicated kedgeree made with the spine marrow of sturgeon, semolina kache, salmon collops, mushrooms, onions, and rice, rolled up in a brioche paste and baked for fifty min∗

3

* Not from my souffle, but from the bullet of a mad Russian.

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
utes? Or was it our still more exotic Karoly Eclairs, stuffed with a
puree of woodcocks’ entrails cooked in champagne, covered with a
brown chaud-froid sauce and masked with game jelly? At this distance of time, I do not remember, but I remember exactly what Pitard said to me: “Next time you see that we are running out of a plat
du jour, come and tell me. I will then get on the telephone to other
hotels and restaurants until I find one which has the same dish on its
menu. Then I will send you in a taxi to bring back a supply. Never
again tell a waiter that we are fresh out of anything.”
(Today I see red when anybody at Ogilvy, Benson & Mather
tells a client that we cannot produce an advertisement or a television
commercial on the day we have promised it. In the best establishments, promises are always kept, whatever it may cost in agony and
overtime.)
Soon after I joined M. Pitard’s brigade I was faced with a problem in morality for which neither my father nor my schoolmasters
had prepared me. The chef garde-manger sent me to the chef saucier
with some raw sweetbreads which smelled so putrid that I knew they
would endanger the life of any client who ate them; the sauce would
mask their condition, and the client would eat them. I protested to
the chef garde-manger, but he told me to carry out his order; he
knew that he would be in hot water if M. Pitard discovered that he
had run out of fresh sweetbreads. What was I to do? I had been
brought up to believe that it is dishonorable to inform. But I did just
that. I took the putrid sweetbreads to M. Pitard, and invited him to
smell them. Without a word to me, he went over to the chef gardemanger and fired him. The poor bastard had to leave, then and there.
In Down and Out in Paris and London George Orwell told the
world that French kitchens are dirty. He had never worked at the
Majestic. M. Pitard was a martinet in making us keep the kitchen
clean. Twice a day I had to scrape the wooden surface of the larder
table with a sharp plane. Twice a day the floor was scrubbed, and
clean sawdust put down. Once a week a bug-catcher scoured the
kitchen in search of roaches. We were issued clean uniforms every
morning.
(Today I am a martinet in making my staff keep their offices
shipshape. A messy office creates an atmosphere of sloppiness, and
leads to the disappearance of secret papers.)
We cooks were badly paid, but M. Pitard made so much from
the commissions which his suppliers paid him that he could afford to
live in a chateau. Far from concealing his wealth from the rest of us,
he drove to work in a taxi, carried a cane with a gold head, and
dressed, when off-duty, like an international banker. This flaunting
of privilege stimulated our ambition to follow in his footsteps.
The immortal Auguste Escoffier had the same idea. When he
was Chef des Cuisines at the Carlton in London before the First
World War, he used to drive to the Derby on the box of a coach-andfour, dressed in a gray frock coat and top hat. Among my fellow
cooks at the Majestic, Escoffier’s Guide Culinaire was still the definitive authority, the court of last appeal in all our arguments about
recipes. Just before he died he emerged from retirement and came to
luncheon in our kitchen; it was like Brahms lunching with the musicians of the Philharmonic.
During the service of luncheon and dinner, M. Pitard stationed
himself at the counter where we cooks handed our dishes to the
waiters. He inspected every single dish before it left the kitchen.
Sometimes he sent it back to the cook for more work. Always he
reminded us not to put too much on the plate—“pas trap!” He
wanted the Majestic to make a profit.

(Today I inspect every campaign before it goes to the client, and
send back many of them for more work. And I share M. Pitard’s passion for profit.)
Perhaps the ingredient in M. Pitard’s leadership which made the
most profound impression on me was his industry. I found my sixtythree hours bending over a red-hot stove so exhausting that I had to
spend my day off lying on my back in a meadow, looking at the sky.
But Pitard worked seventy-seven hours a week, and took only one
free day a fortnight.
(That is about my schedule today. I figure that my staff will be
less reluctant to work overtime if I work longer hours than they do.
An executive who recently left my agency wrote in his farewell letter, “You set the pace on doing homework. It is a disconcerting experience to spend a Saturday evening in the garden next door to your
house, carousing for four hours while you sit, unmoving, at your
desk by the window doing your homework. The word gets around.”)
I learned something else at the Majestic: If you can make yourself indispensable to a client, you will never be fired. Our most important client, an American lady who occupied a suite of seven
rooms, subjected herself to a diet which was based on a baked apple
at every meal. One day she threatened to move to the Ritz unless her
apple was always burst. I developed a technique of baking two apples, passing their flesh through a sieve to remove all traces of core,
and then replacing the flesh of both apples in one skin. The result
was the most voluptuous baked apple our client had ever seen, and
more calories than she ever suspected. Word came down to the
kitchen that the chef who was baking those apples must be given
tenure.
My closest friend was an elderly argentier who bore a striking
resemblance to the late Charles C. Burlingham. His most cherished
memory was a vision of Edward VII (Edward the Cares-sor) floating
majestically across the sidewalk to his brougham after two magnums
of entente cordiale at Maxim’s. My friend was a Communist. Nobody cared about that; they were far more impressed by my own nationality. A Scotsman in a French kitchen is as rare as a Scotsman on
Madison Avenue. My fellow chefs, who had heard tales of my ancestral Highlands, christened me Sauvage.
I became still more sauvage when I arrived on Madison Avenue. Managing an advertising agency isn’t all beer and skittles. After
fourteen years of it, I have come to the conclusion that the top man
has one principal responsibility: to provide an atmosphere in which
creative mavericks can do useful work. Dr. William Menninger has
described the difficulties with uncanny insight:
In the advertising industry to be successful you must, of necessity, accumulate a group of creative people. This probably means a
fairly high percentage of high strung, brilliant, eccentric nonconformists.
Like most doctors, you are on call day and night, seven days a
week. This constant pressure on every advertising executive must
take a considerable physical and psychological toll—the pressure
that the executive places on the account executive, on the supervisor,
and they in turn on the creative people. Then, most of all, the clients’
pressures on them and on you.
A special problem with the employees of an advertising agency
is that each one watches the other one very carefully to see if one
gets a carpet before the other, to see if one has an assistant before the
other, or to see if one makes an extra nickel before the other. It isn’t
that they want the carpet or the assistant or the nickel so much as it is
the recognition of their “standing with father.”
The executive is inevitably a father figure. To be a good father,
whether it is to his children or to his associates, requires that he be

4

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
understanding, that he be considerate, and that he be human enough
to be affectionate.
In the early days of our agency I worked cheek by jowl with
every employee; communication and affection were easy. But as our
brigade grows bigger I find it more difficult. How can I be a father
figure to people who don’t even know me by sight? My agency now
employs 497 men and women. I have discovered that they have an
average of one hundred friends each—a total of 49,700 friends. If I
tell all my staff what we are doing in the agency, what we believe in,
what our ambitions are, they will tell their 49,700 friends. And this
will give us 49,700 rooters for Ogilvy, Benson & Mather.
So once a year I assemble the whole brigade in the auditorium
of the Museum of Modern Art, and give them a candid report on our
operations, profits and all. Then I tell them what kind of behavior I
admire, in these terms:
(1) I admire people who work hard, who bite the bullet. I dislike
passengers who don’t pull their weight in the boat. It is more fun to
be overworked than to be underworked. There is an economic factor
built into hard work. The harder you work, the fewer employees we
need, and the more profit we make. The more profit we make, the
more money becomes available for all of us.
(2) I admire people with first-class brains, because you cannot
run a great advertising agency without brainy people. But brains are
not enough unless they are combined with intellectual honesty.
(3) I have an inviolable rule against employing nepots and
spouses, because they breed politics. Whenever two of our people
get married, one of them must depart—preferably the female, to look
after her baby.
(4) I admire people who work with gusto. If you don’t enjoy
what you are doing, I beg you to find another job. Remember the
Scottish proverb, “Be happy while you’re living, for you’re a long
time dead.”
(5) I despise toadies who suck up to their bosses; they are generally the same people who bully their subordinates.
(6) I admire self-confident professionals, the craftsmen who do
their jobs with superlative excellence. They always seem to respect
the expertise of their colleagues. They don’t poach.
(7) I admire people who hire subordinates who are good
enough to succeed them. I pity people who are so insecure that they
feel compelled to hire inferiors as their subordinates.
(8) I admire people who build up their subordinates, because
this is the only way we can promote from within the ranks. I detest
having to go outside to fill important jobs, and I look forward to the
day when that will never be Necessary.
(9) I admire people with gentle manners who treat other people
as human beings. I abhor quarrelsome people. I abhor people who
wage paper-warfare. The best way to keep the peace is to be candid.
Remember Blake:
I was angry with my friend;
I told my wrath, my wrath did end.
I was angry with my foe;
I told it not, my wrath did grow.
(10) I admire well-organized people who deliver their work on
time. The Duke of Wellington never went home until he had finished
all the work on his desk.
Having told my staff what I expect of them, I then tell them
what I expect of myself:
(1) I try to be fair and to be firm, to make unpopular decisions
without cowardice, to create an atmosphere of stability, and to listen
more than I talk.

(2) I try to sustain the momentum of the agency—its ferment,
its vitality, its forward thrust.
(3) I try to build the agency by landing new accounts. (At this
point the upturned faces in my audience look like baby birds waiting- for the father bird to feed them.)
(4) I try to win the confidence of our clients at their highest
level.
(5) I try to make sufficient profits to keep you all from penury
in old age.
(6) I plan our policies far into the future.
(7) I try to recruit people of the highest quality at all levels, to
build the hottest staff in the agency business.
(8) I try to get the best out of every man and woman in the
agency.
Running an agency takes vitality, and sufficient resilience to
pick oneself up after defeats. Affection for one’s henchmen, and tolerance for their foibles. A genius for composing sibling rivalries. An
unerring eye for the main chance. And morality—people who work
in advertising agencies can suffer serious blows to their esprit de
corps if they catch their leader in acts of unprincipled opportunism.
Above all, the head of an agency must know how to delegate.
This is easier said than done. The clients don’t like the management
of their accounts to be delegated to juniors, any more than patients in
hospitals like the doctors to turn them over to medical students.
In my opinion, delegation has been carried too far in some of
the big agencies. Their top men have withdrawn into administration,
leaving all contact with clients to juniors. This process builds large
agencies, but it leads to mediocrity in performance. I have no ambition to preside over a vast bureaucracy. That is why we have only
nineteen clients. The pursuit of excellence is less profitable than the
pursuit of bigness, but it can be more satisfying.
The act of delegation often results in interposing a foreman between the agency boss and his staff. When this happens, the employees feel like children whose mother turns them over to the tender
mercies of a nanny. But they become reconciled to the separation
when they discover that the nannies are more patient, more accessible, and more expert than I am.
My success or failure as the head of an agency depends more
than anything else on my ability to find people who can create great
campaigns, men with fire in their bellies. Creativity has become the
subject of formal study by psychologists. If they can identify the
characteristics of creative individuals, they can put into my hands a
psychometric test for selecting young people who can be taught to
become great campaign-builders. Dr. Frank Barren at the University
of California’s Institute of Personality Assessment has done promising research in this direction. His conclusions fit my own observations:
Creative people are especially observant, and they value accurate observation (telling themselves the truth) more than other people
do.
They often express part-truths, but this they do vividly; the part
they express is the generally unrecognized; by displacement of accent and apparent disproportion in statement they seek to point to the
usually unobserved.
They see things as others do, but also as others do not.
They are born with greater brain capacity; they have more ability to hold many ideas at once, and to compare more ideas with one
another—hence to make a richer synthesis.
They are by constitution more vigorous, and have available to
them an exceptional fund of psychic and physical energy.

5

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
Their universe is thus more complex, and in addition they usually lead more complex lives.
They have more contact than most people do with the life of the
unconscious—with fantasy, reverie, the world of imagination. ∗
While I wait for Dr. Barron and his colleagues to synthesize
their clinical observations into formal psychometric tests, I have to
rely on more old-fashioned and empirical techniques for spotting
creative dynamos. Whenever I see a remarkable advertisement or
television commercial, I find out who wrote it. Then I call the writer
on the telephone and congratulate him on his work. A poll has
shown that creative people would rather work at Ogilvy, Benson &
Mather than at any other agency, so my telephone call often produces an application for a job.
I then ask the candidate to send me the six best advertisements
and commercials he has ever written. This reveals, among other
things, whether he can recognize a good advertisement when he sees
one, or is only the instrument of an able supervisor. SomeSometimes I call on my victim at home; ten minutes after crossing the threshold I can tell whether he has a richly furnished mind,
what kind of taste he has, and whether he is happy enough to sustain
pressure.
We receive hundreds of job applications every year. I am particularly interested in those which come from the Middle West. I
would rather hire an ambitious young man from Des Moines than a
high-priced fugitive from a fashionable agency on Madison Avenue.
When I observe these grandees, coldly correct and critically dull, I
am reminded of Roy Campbell’s “On Some South African Novelists”:
You praise the firm restraint with which they write
I’m with you there, of course.
They use the snaffle and the curb all right;
But where’s the bloody horse?
I pay special attention to applications from Western Europe.
Some of our best writers are Europeans. They are well educated,
they work hard, they are less conventional, and they are more objective in their approach to the American consumer.
Advertising is a business of words, but advertising agencies are
infested with men and women who cannot write. They cannot write
advertisements, and they cannot write plans. They are as helpless as
deaf mutes on the stage of the Metropolitan Opera.
It is sad that the majority of men who are responsible for advertising today, both the agents and the clients, are so conventional. The
business community wants remarkable advertising, but turns a cold
shoulder to the kind of people who can produce it. That is why most
advertisements are so infernally dull. Albert Lasker made
$50,000,000 out of advertising, partly because he could stomach the
atrocious manners of his great copywriters— John E. Kennedy,
Claude C. Hopkins, and Frank Hummert.
Some of the mammoth agencies are now being managed by
second-generation caretakers who floated to the top of their organizations because they were smooth contact men. But courtiers cannot
create potent campaigns. The sad truth is that despite the sophisticated apparatus of the modern agency, advertising isn’t getting the
results it used to get in the crude days of Lasker and Hopkins. Our
business needs massive transfusions of talent. And talent, I believe,
is most likely to be found among nonconformists, dissenters, and rebels.
∗

“The Psychology of Imagination” by Frank Barron, Scientific
American (September 1958).

Not long ago the University of Chicago invited me to participate in a seminar on the Creative Organization. Most of the other
participants were learned professors of psychology who make it their
business to study what they call CREATIVITY. Feeling like a pregnant woman at a convention of obstetricians, I told them what I have
learned about the creative process from my experience as the chief
of seventy-three writers and artists.
The creative process requires more than reason. Most original
thinking isn’t even verbal. It requires “a groping experimentation
with ideas, governed by intuitive hunches and inspired by the unconscious.” The majority of business men are incapable of original
thinking, because they are unable to escape from the tyranny of reason. Their imaginations are blocked.
I am almost incapable of logical thought, but I have developed
techniques for keeping open the telephone line to my unconscious, in
case that disorderly repository has anything to tell me. I hear a great
deal of music. I am on friendly terms with John Barleycorn. I take
long hot baths. I garden. I go into retreat among the Amish. I watch
birds. I go for long walks in the country. And I take frequent vacations, so that my brain can lie fallow—no golf, no cocktail parties,
no tennis, no bridge, no concentration; only a bicycle.
While thus employed in doing nothing, I receive a constant
stream of telegrams from my unconscious, and these become the raw
material for my advertisements. But more is required: hard work, an
open mind, and ungovernable curiosity.
Many of the greatest creations of man have been inspired by the
desire to make money. When George Frederick Handel was on his
beam ends, he shut himself up for twenty-one days and emerged
with the complete score of Messiah—and hit the jackpot. Few of the
themes of Messiah were original; Handel dredged them up from his
unconscious, where they had been stored since he heard them in
other composers’ work, or since he had composed them for his own
forgotten operas.
At the end of a concert at Carnegie Hall, Walter Damrosch
asked Rachmaninoff what sublime thoughts had passed through his
head as he stared out into the audience during the playing of his concerto. “I was counting the house,” said Rachmaninoff.
If Oxford undergraduates were paid for their work, I would
have performed miracles of scholarship and become Regius Professor of Modern History; it wasn’t until I tasted lucre on Madison
Avenue that I began to work in earnest.
In the modern world of business, it is useless to be a creative,
original thinker unless you can also sell what you create. Management cannot be expected to recognize a good idea unless it is presented to them by a good salesman. In my fourteen years on Madison Avenue I have had only one great idea which I was unable to
sell. (I wanted International Paper to dedicate their 26,000,000 acres
of woodlands to the public for camping, fishing, hunting, hiking, and
bird-watching. I suggested that this sublime gesture would rank with
Carnegie’s libraries and Rockefeller’s foundation as an act of historic munificence. It is a good idea, but Hailed to sell it.)
Finally, I have observed that no creative organization, whether
it is a research laboratory, a magazine, a Paris kitchen, or an advertising agency, will produce a great body of work unless it is led by a
formidable individual. The Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge was
great because of Lord Rutherford. The New Yorker was great because of Ross. The Majestic was great because of Pitard.
It isn’t everybody who enjoys working in the atelier of a master.
The implication of dependence gnaws at their vitals, until they conclude:

6

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
To reign is worth ambition though in Hell: Better to reign in
Hell, than serve in Heaven.
So they leave my atelier, only to discover that their paradise is
lost. A few weeks after one of these poor fellows departed, he wrote:
“When I left your agency I was prepared to feel some sadness. What
I felt was distress. I have never been so bereft in all my life. This I
suppose is the price one has to pay for the privilege of having belonged to an elite. There are so few of them around.”
When a good man quits, his cronies wonder why, and generally
suspect that he has been mistreated by management. Recently I have
found a way to prevent this misunderstanding. When my young copy
chief resigned to become Vice Chairman of another agency, he and I
exchanged letters in the style of a cabinet minister resigning to a
Prime Minister, and they were printed in our staff magazine. The
dear defector wrote to me:
You must accept the blame for what I am as an advertising1
man. You invented me and have taught me how much I do not know.
You once said that you should have charged me tuition all these
years, and it’s true.
I replied in kind:

It has been a grand experience to watch you grow in eleven
short years from cub writer to Copy Chief. You have become one of
our best campaign-builders.
You work hard, and you work fast. Your vitality and resilience
make it possible for you to remain calm and cheerful —contagiously
cheerful—through all the tribulations which buffet copy chiefs.
Few of the great creators have bland personalities. They are
cantankerous egotists, the kind of men who are unwelcome in the
modern corporation. Consider Winston Churchill. He drank like a
fish. He was capricious and willful. When opposed, he sulked. He
was rude to fools. He was wildly extravagant. He wept on the slightest provocation. His conversation was Rabelaisian. He was inconsiderate to his staff. Yet Lord Alanbrooke, his Chief of Staff, could
write:
I shall always look back on the years I worked with him as
some of the most difficult and trying ones in my life. For all that I
thank God that I was given the opportunity of working alongside of
such a man, and of having my eyes opened to the fact that occasionally such supermen exist on this earth.

II
How to Get Clients

FIFTEEN years ago I was an obscure tobacco farmer in Pennsylvania. Today I preside over one of the best advertising agencies in
the United States, with billings of $55,000,000 a year, a payroll of
$5,000,000, and offices in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, San
Francisco, and Toronto.
How did this come to pass? As my Amish friends have said, “It
wonders me.”
On the day in 1948 when I hung out my shingle, I issued the
following Order of the Day:
This is a new agency, struggling for its life. For some time we
shall be overworked and underpaid.
In hiring, the emphasis will be on youth. We are looking for
young turks. I have no use for toadies or hacks. I seek gentlemen
with brains.
Agencies are as big as they deserve to be. We are starring this
one on a shoestring, but we are going to make it a great agency before 1960.
The next day I made a list of the five clients I wanted most:
General Foods, Bristol-Myers, Campbell Soup Company, Lever
Brothers, and Shell. ∗

∗

To pick such blue-chip targets was an act of mad presumption,
but all five of them are now clients of Ogilvy, Benson & Mather.

In the old days it had not been unknown for advertisers of this
magnitude to engage dark-horse agencies. When the head of a
mammoth agency solicited the Camel Cigarette account, he promised to assign thirty copywriters to it, but the canny head of R. J.
Reynolds replied, “How about one good one?” Then he gave his account to a young copywriter called Bill Esty, in whose agency it has
remained for twenty-eight years.
In 1937 Walter Chrysler gave the Plymouth account to Sterling
Getchel, then in his thirty-second year. In 1940 Ed Little gave most
of the Colgate account to a dark-horse named Ted Bates. And General Foods discovered Young & Rubicam when that agency was
only one year old. Writing after his retirement, John Orr Young, one
of the founders of Young & Rubicam, offered this advice to manufacturers in search of an agency:
If you are lucky enough to find some young men with that special energy and daring which leads them into business for themselves, you will benefit from having that incalculably valuable quality serving you.
It is easy to be beguiled by acres of desks, departments, and
other big agency appurtenances. What counts is the real motive
power of the agency, the creative potency.
Several great advertising successes have been achieved by advertisers who benefited by the incentive, ambition and energy of an
advertising organization in process of building a reputation.

7

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
These large advertisers sought to buy their advertising agency
service on a rising market, during the agent’s work-clothes days or
pre-adipose period. **
By the time I came on the scene, the big advertisers had grown
more cautious. God had joined the side of the big battalions. Stanley
Resor, who had been head of J. Walter Thompson since 1916,
warned me, “The concentration of industry into huge corporations is
being reflected in the world of advertising. The big accounts now require such a wide range of services that only the huge agencies can
handle them. Why don’t you give up your pipe dream and join J.
Walter Thompson?”
To new agencies about to embark on the pursuit of their first
clients, I bequeath a set-piece which worked magic in my early days.
I used to ask prospective clients to ponder the life cycle of a typical
agency, the inevitable pattern of rise and decline, from dynamite to
dry rot:
Once every few years a great new agency is born. It is ambitious, hard working, full of dynamite. It gets accounts from soft old
agencies. It does great work.
The years pass. The founders get rich, and tired. Their creative
fires go out. They become extinct volcanoes.
The agency may continue to prosper. Its original momentum is
not yet spent. It has powerful contacts. But it has grown too big. It
produces dull, routine campaigns, based on the echo of old victories.
Dry rot sets in. The emphasis shifts to collateral services, to conceal
the agency’s creative bankruptcy. At this stage, it begins losing accounts to vital new agencies, ruthless upstarts who work hard and
put all their dynamite into their advertisements.
We can all name famous agencies which are moribund. You
hear demoralizing whispers in their corridors, long before the truth
dawns on their clients.
At this point I could always see my prospective client struggling
to conceal the fact that I had hit a nerve. Could it be that I was describing his moribund agency?
Today, fourteen years later, I am shocked by this villainous
stratagem. My scholarly uncle Sir Humphry Rolleston used to say of
physicians, “First they get on, then they get honor, then they get
honest.” I am now approaching the stage of honesty, and butter
wouldn’t melt in my mouth. But everything looked different when
my bank account was empty. As Gilbert’s Pirate King explained:
When I sally forth to seek my prey I help myself in a royal way:
I sink a few more ships, it’s true, Than a well-bred monarch ought to
do; But many a king on a first-class throne, If he wants to call his
crown his own, Must manage somehow to get through More dirty
work than ever / do.
Following Henry Ford’s advice to his dealers that they should
“solicit by personal visitation,” I started by soliciting advertisers
who did not employ an agency at all, figuring that I lacked the credentials to push any incumbent agency out of bed. My first target
was Wedgwood China, which spent about $40,000 a year. Mr.
Wedgwood and his advertising manageress received me with the
greatest civility.
“We dislike agencies,” she said. “They are nothing but a nuisance. So we prepare our own advertisements. Do you have any fault
to find with them?”
“On the contrary,” I replied, “I admire them. But if you will just
allow me to buy the space for you, the magazines will give me the
commission. It will cost you nothing, and I will promise never to
darken your door again.”
**

John Orr Young, Adventures in Advertising, Harper, 1948. 26

Hensleigh Wedgwood is a kindly man, and the next morning he
wrote me a formal letter of appointment, to which I replied by telegram, “A Full Peel of Kent Treble Bob Major.” * We were in business.
But my capital was only f 6,000 and this was scarcely enough to
keep me afloat until the first commissions arrived. Fortunately for
me, my elder brother Francis was then Managing Director of Mather
& Crowther Ltd., a venerable and distinguished advertising agency
in London. He came to the rescue by persuading his partners to
augment my capital and lend me their name. My old friend Bobby
Bevan of S. H. Benson Ltd., another English agency, followed suit,
and Sir Francis Meynell got Sir Stafford Cripps to authorize the
transatlantic investment.
Bobby and Francis insisted that I find an American to be head
of the agency. They did not believe that one of their fellow countrymen could persuade American manufacturers to give him any business. To expect an Englishman, or even a Scotsman, to be successful
in American advertising would be absurd; advertising was not part
of the British genius. Indeed, the British had always abhorred the
whole idea of advertising. As Punch put it in 1848: “Let us be a nation of shopkeepers as much as we please, but there is no necessity
that we should become a nation of advertisers.” Out of 5,500
knights, baronets, and peers alive today, only one is an advertising
agent.
(Prejudice against advertising and its practitioners is less
marked in the United States. Neil McElroy, a former advertising
manager of Procter & Gamble, was appointed Secretary of Defense
in Eisenhower’s administration. Chester Bowles graduated from
Madison Avenue to become Governor of Connecticut, Ambassador
to India, and Under Secretary of State. But even in the United States
it is rare for advertising men to be appointed to important jobs in
government. This is a pity, because some of them carry more guns
than most of the lawyers, professors, bankers, and journalists who
are favored. Senior advertising men are better equipped to define
problems and opportunities; to set up short-range and long-range
goals; to measure results; to lead large executive forces; to make lucid presentations to committees; and to operate within the disciplines
of a budget. Observation of my elders and betters in other advertising agencies leads me to believe that many of them are more objective, better organized, more vigorous, and harder-working than their
opposite numbers in legal practice, teaching, banking, and journalism.)
I had very little to offer the kind of American executive who
would qualify to head up an agency. However, after casting about
for several months, I invited Anderson Hewitt to leave the Chicago
office of J. Walter Thompson and become my boss.
He was a dynamo of energy, he was unabashed in the presence
of nabobs, and he had connections whose influence made my mouth
water.
Within one year Andy Hewitt brought in two splendid accounts.
With the help of John La Farge, who was billed as our copy chief, he
landed Sunoco. And three months later his father-in-law Arthur Page
induced the Chase Bank to hire us. When we ran out of capital,
Andy Hewitt persuaded J. P. Morgan & Company to lend us
$100,000 with no security except the confidence of his uncle Leffingwell, who was then Chairman of Morgan.

*

It took Dorothy Sayers’ Lord Peter Wimsey and his fellow
change-ringers all night to ring this intricate peal of bells in the parish church of Fenchurch St. Paul.
8

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
Alas, my partnership with Andy was not a happy one. We tried
to conceal our differences from the staff, but children always know
when their parents are at loggerheads. After four years of discord,
exacerbated by the pressures of our meteoric success, the agency began to split into two factions. After much agony for all concerned,
Andy resigned and I became head of the agency. I take comfort from
the fact that he went on to great things at other agencies, unencumbered by an insufferable partner.
When we started our agency, we placed ourselves in competition with 3,000 other agencies. Our first job was to escape from obscurity, so that prospective clients would add us to their shopping
lists. We succeeded in doing this faster than I had dared hope, and it
may be helpful to other adventurers if I describe how we went about
it.
First, I invited ten reporters from the advertising trade press to
luncheon. I told them of my insane ambition to build a major agency
from scratch. From that point on they gave me priceless tips on new
business, and printed every release I sent them, however trivial;
bless them. Rosser Reeves protested that nobody went to the bathroom at our agency without the news appearing in the trade press.
Second, I followed Edward L. Bernays’ advice to make no more
than two speeches a year. Every speech I made was calculated to
provoke the greatest possible stir on Madison Avenue. The first was
a lecture to the Art Directors Club in which I un-toaded everything I
knew about the graphics of advertising. Before going home, I gave
each art director in my audience a mimeographed list of thirty-nine
rules for making good layouts. Those ancient rules are still being
passed around on Madison Avenue.
In my next speech I denounced the fatuity of the advertising
courses being offered in colleges, and offered $ 10,000 to help start a
college of advertising which would issue licenses to practice. This
idiotic proposal hit the front pages. Soon the trade press took to calling me for comment on most of the issues that came up. I always
spoke my mind, and I was always quoted.
Third, I made friends with men whose jobs brought them into
contact with major advertisers—the researchers, the public relations
consultants, the management engineers, and the space salesmen.
They saw in me a possible source of future business for themselves,
but what they got was a pitch on the merits of our agency.
Fourth, I sent frequent progress reports to 600 people in every
walk of life. This barrage of direct mail was read by the most august
advertisers. For example, when I solicited part of the Seagram account, Sam Bronfman played back to me the last two paragraphs of a
sixteen-page speech I had sent him shortly before; and he hired us.
Gentle reader, if you are shocked by these confessions of selfadvertisement, I can only plead that if I had behaved in a more professional way, it would have taken me twenty years to arrive. I had
neither the time nor the money to wait. I was poor, unknown, and in
a hurry.
Meanwhile, I was working from dawn until midnight, six days a
week, creating campaigns for the clients who hired our infant
agency. Some of those campaigns made advertising history.
At first we took every account we could get—a toy tortoise, a
patent hairbrush, an English motorcycle. But I always kept my eye
on my list of five blue-chip targets, and put our meager profits to
work building the kind of organization which, I thought, would ultimately attract their attention.
I always showed prospective clients the dramatic improvement
that followed when Ogilvy, Benson & Mather took accounts away
from old agencies—“in every case we have blazed new trails, and in
every case sales have gone up.” But I was never able to keep a

straight face when I said this; if a company’s sales had not grown
more than sixfold in the previous twenty-one years, its growth had
been less than average.
Some very ordinary agencies had the good fortune to hold portfolios of very ordinary accounts in 1945. All they had to do was fasten their seat belts and be lofted to enormous heights on the curve of
a skyrocketing economy. It takes extraordinary ability for an agency
to get accounts when everybody’s sales are booming, but when the
economy is jolted by a recession, the old fossils come unstuck, and
vigorous new agencies leap forward.
An agency’s first clients are the hardest to get, because it has no
credentials, no record of success, no reputation. At this stage it often
pays to speculate by conducting a pilot survey on some aspect of
your prospective client’s business. There are few manufacturers
whose curiosity is not piqued when you offer to show them the results of such a survey.
The first time I tried this was with Helena Rubinstein, who had
changed agencies seventeen times in the previous twenty-five years.
Her account was then being handled by an agency which belonged to
her younger son, Horace Titus. Our speculative research revealed
that his advertising was ineffectual.
Madame Rubinstein showed no interest in the results of our research, but when I uncorked some advertisements based on it, she
perked up, showing particular interest in photographs of my wife
taken before and after treatment in the Rubinstein Salon. “I think
your wife looked better before” said Madame.
To my amazement, Horace Titus advised his mother to remove
her account from the agency he owned, and give it to me. This she
did. Horace and I became friends, and remained so until his death
eight years later.
In 1958 we were invited by Standard Oil (New Jersey) to show
them what kind of advertising we would run if they were to hire us.
Ten days later I presented them with a hamper of fourteen different
campaigns, and won the account. Next to luck, fertility and midnight
oil are the best weapons to use in hunting new business.
We spent $30,000 on a speculative presentation to Bromo Seltzer. It was based on a cogently argued thesis that the majority of
headaches are of psychosomatic origin. But LeMoyne Billings, who
was then Bromo Seltzer’s advertising manager, preferred a presentation made by Lennen & Newell.
Today we have neither the time nor the stomach to prepare
speculative campaigns. Instead, we show our prospects what we
have done for other manufacturers, we explain our policies, and we
introduce our department heads. We try to reveal ourselves I as we
really are, warts and all. If the prospective client likes the look of us,
he hires us. If he doesn’t like the look of us, we are better off without
him.
When KLM Royal Dutch Airlines decided to change agencies,
they invited Ogilvy, Benson & Mather and four others to prepare
speculative campaigns. We were first on their tour of inspection. I
opened the meeting by saying, “We have prepared nothing. Instead
we would like you to tell us about your problems. Then you can visit
the other four agencies on your list. They have all prepared speculative campaigns. If you like any of them, your choice will be easy. If
you don’t, come back and hire us. We will then embark on the research which always precedes the preparation of advertisements at
our agency.”
The Dutchmen accepted this bleak proposition, and five days
later, after seeing the speculative campaigns prepared by the other
agencies, they came back and hired us. To my great joy.

9

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
You cannot generalize. In some cases it pays to show speculative advertisements, as with Jersey and Helena Rubinstein. In some
cases, it pays to be the one agency which refuses to do so, as with
KLM. The agencies which are most successful in new business are
those whose spokesmen show the most sensitive insight into the
psychological make-up of the prospective client. Rigidity and salesmanship do not combine.
There is one stratagem which seems to work in almost every
case: get the prospect to do most of the talking. The more you listen,
the wiser he thinks you are. One day I went to see Alexander
Konoff, an elderly Russian who had made a fortune manufacturing
zippers. After showing me his factory in Newark (every department
was festooned with six-foot zippers for re- I/ mains bags) he took
me back to New York in his chauffeur-driven Cadillac. I noticed that
he was holding a copy of The New Republic, a magazine read by
rather few clients.
“Are you a Democrat or a Republican?” I asked.
“I am a Socialist. I played an active part in the Russian Revolution.”
I asked if he had known Kerensky.
“Not that revolution,” Konoff snorted. “The revolution of 1904.
When I was a boy I used to walk five miles to work in a cigarette
factory, barefoot in the snow. My real name is Kaganovitch. The
FBI thinks that I am the brother of the Kaganovitch who is now in
the Politburo. They are mistaken.” He roared with laughter. “When I
first came to America I worked as a machinist in Pittsburgh for fifty
cents an hour. My wife was an embroiderer. She made fourteen dollars a week, but never got paid.”
This proud old Socialist millionaire went on to tell me that he
had known Lenin and Trotsky intimately during the days of their exile. I listened, so we got the account.
Silence can be golden. Not long ago the advertising manager of
Ampex came to see me, scouting for a new agency. For once in my
life, I had lunched too well, and had lost the power of speech. All I
could do was to motion the prospective client to a seat, and look at
him in a questioning way. He talked for an hour, without interruption
from me. I could see that he was impressed by my thoughtfulness; it
isn’t every advertising agent who is so taciturn on these occasions.
Then, to my horror, he asked me a question. Had I ever heard an
Ampex record player? I shook my head, too potted for speech.
“Well, I want you to hear our equipment in your home. It comes
in different styles. How is your home decorated?”
I shrugged my shoulders, not trusting myself to speak.
“Modern?”
I shook my head; strong silent man.
“Early American?”
Again I shook my head; still waters run deep.
“Eighteenth century?”
I nodded pensively, but held my tongue. A week later the Ampex arrived. It was magnificent, but my partners decided that the account was too small to be profitable, and I was obliged to withdraw.
Handling accounts once you have got them is deadly serious
business. You are spending other people’s money, and the fate of
their company often rests in your hands. But I regard the hunt for
new clients as a sport. If you play it grimly, you will die of ulcers. If
you play it with lighthearted gusto, you will survive your failures
without losing sleep. Play to win, but enjoy the fun.
In my youth I sold kitchen stoves at the Ideal Homes Exhibition
in London. Each sale required a personalized pitch which took me
forty minutes to administer. The problem was to pick out from the
milling crowds those rare individuals who were rich enough to buy

my stove, which cost $400. I learned to smell them; they smoked
Turkish cigarettes, a mark of aristocracy, like an Old Etonian tie.
In later years I developed similar techniques for smelling out
big advertisers in a crowd. Once I came away from a New York
luncheon of the Scottish Council with the presentiment that four of
the men I had just met for the first time would one day become my
clients. And so it turned out.

***
The biggest account I have ever got was Shell. The Shell people
liked what we had done for Rolls-Royce well enough to include us
on a list of agencies which they were considering. To each agency
they sent a long and searching questionnaire.
Now it so happens that I deplore the practice of selecting agencies by questionnaire, and I have consigned dozens of them to garbage cans. When a company called Stahl-Meyer sent me a questionnaire, I replied, “Who is Stahl-Meyer?” But I stayed up all night
drafting answers to the Shell questionnaire. My answers were more
candid than is customary, but I thought they would make a favorable
impression on Max Burns, a fellow director of the New York Philharmonic who was then President of Shell, if only they were passed
up to him. The next morning I learned that he had gone to England,
so I flew to London and left a message at his hotel, saying that I
wanted to see him. For ten days there was no reply. I had almost
given up hope, when my telephone operator reported that Mr. Burns
wanted me to lunch with him on the following day. I had already engaged myself to lunch with the Secretary of State for Scotland, so I
sent Burns the following signal:
Mr. Ogilvy is lunching with the Secretary of State for Scotland
at the House of Commons. They would be delighted if you would
join them.
On the way to the House—it was pouring rain and we shared an
umbrella—I was able to give Burns the gist of my answers to his
questionnaire. Back in New York the next day, he introduced me to
the man who was about to succeed him as President of Shell—the
remarkable Dr. Monroe Spaght. Three weeks later Monty Spaght
telephoned to say that we had the account. I was so dumfounded by
this momentous news that my aplomb deserted me, and I could only
blurt out, “God help us.”
Our appointment by Shell forced us to leave the service of
Standard Oil (New Jersey). I liked the Jersey people, and I was
proud of the part we had played in persuading them to save the superb Play of the Week program on television. David Susskind said in
Life that “if there were a Congressional Medal of Honor for business, this sponsor should get it.” But it was not generally known that
in order to secure the sponsorship of that program for Jersey, I had
been obliged to surrender all my 15 per cent commission to Lorillard, the manufacturers of Old Gold and Kent cigarettes. Lorillard
had pre-empted one spot on the doomed program, and only my offer
to give them my commission ($6,000 a week) persuaded them to
make room for Jersey. I was disappointed with Jersey for refusing to
make good my sacrifice. No agency can afford to work without pay;
so I transferred my allegiance to Shell.
Sometimes I have made disastrous bloopers in the pursuit of
new business. When I met Sir Alexander Til’Maxwell, head of the
British Travel & Holidays Association, we needed a new account in
a hurry. He snubbed me at the start. “Our advertising,” he said, “is
good, very good indeed. I haven’t the remotest intention of changing
agencies.”

10

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
I replied, “When Henry VIII was dying, it was believed that any
man who dared to tell him the awful truth would be decapitated. But
reasons of state required that a volunteer should be found, and Henry
Denny stepped forward. King Henry was so grateful to Denny for
his courage that he gave him a pair of gloves and a knighthood. Sir
Henry Denny was my ancestor. His example inspires me to tell you
that your advertising is very bad.”
Maxwell exploded, and never spoke to me again. But shortly afterward he gave us the British Travel account, on condition that I
play no part in it, and for many years my partners had to conceal the
fact that I was in charge. Our campaign was so successful that the
number of American visitors going to Britain quadrupled in ten
years. Today Britain earns more from its visitors than any other
European country except Italy. “For a small and damp island this is a
pretty staggering success,” says The Economist.
In due course Sir Alexander Maxwell retired, and I was able to
come out of hiding. The man who now sits in his chair is Lord Mabane, a former cabinet minister. When I go to England he sends his
car to drive me down to Rye, where he lives in Henry James’s house.
His chauffeur once startled my American wife by asking her if she
would like to suck one of his gums. *
English clients employ rum retainers. The butler at the RollsRoyce guest house near Derby entered our bedroom on a hot summer morning, without knocking. There lay my wife, sound asleep.
Poking his moon face into her ear, he shouted, “Poached or fried,
madam?”
Our solicitation of the Armstrong Cork account took a bizarre
course. At the start I was bidden to lunch with Max Banzhaf, the advertising manager, at his golf club near Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Our
table looked out on the eighteenth green, and for two hours Max regaled me with golfing stories. His assessment of advertising agents
appeared to revolve around their ability to hit golf balls. Did I share
his love of golf?
I have never been on a golf course in my life, but to admit it at
that moment would have destroyed my chances of landing the account. So I mumbled an ambiguous evasion, to the effect that 1 had
no time for games. Max suggested that we play a round, then and
there. I protested that I had not brought my clubs.
“I will lend you mine!”
But Max gracefully accepted the next excuse I offered, which
had to do with my digestion. And before I left he explained that the
only remaining impediment to the success of my solicitation lay in
the fact that Henning Prentis, his Chairman, was a devoted and lifelong friend of Bruce Barton, whose agency had enjoyed a monopoly
on Armstrong advertising for forty years.
The following day luck intervened on my side. The Donegal
Society invited me to address their annual reunion in one of the oldest Presbyterian churches in the United States. I was to speak from
the pulpit, and Mr. Prentis was to be in the congregation. My sermon
was fixed for June 23, that marvelous midsummer day on which my
grandfather, my father, and I were born. ** As my subject I took the
role of my fellow countrymen in building America, without referring
directly to the one Scotsman on Madison Avenue:
Ralph Waldo Emerson and Thomas Carlyle once went for a
walk through the Scottish countryside. When Emerson saw the poor
soil around Ecclefechan, he asked Carlyle, “What do you raise on
land like this?”
*

English; a goody manufactured by Rowntree.
My father once gave me odds of 100 to 1 against my continuing this remarkable series. I haven’t yet.
**

Carlyle replied, “We raise men.”
What manner of men do they raise on that poor Scottish soil?
And what becomes of them when they come to the United States?
They work hard. I was brought up with my father’s favorite
proverb ringing in my ears, “Hard work never killed a man.”
Patrick Henry was a Scot, and John Paul Jones was the son of a
Scottish gardener. Allan Pinkerton came from Scotland and started
the secret service. It was Pinkerton who uncovered the first plot to
assassinate Lincoln in February 1861.
Thirty-five Justices of the United States Supreme Court have
been Scotsmen. And industrialists galore, including an industrialist
who has contributed so much to the prosperity and culture of your
own Lancaster County—Mr. Henning Prentis of the Armstrong Cork
Company.
From my vantage point in the pulpit I was able to observe Mr.
Prentis’ reaction to this apostrophe. He did not look displeased, and
a few weeks later he agreed to transfer part of the Armstrong account
to our agency.
Of all the new business hoe-downs in which I have engaged, the
one with the largest number of contestants was the United States
Travel Service. No less than 137 agencies threw their hats into the
ring. Our campaigns for Britain and Puerto Rico had been so successful that we were uniquely qualified to advertise the United States
as a tourist destination. I longed to infect my fellow Europeans with
my own passion for the United States. I had spent my life advertising
toothpaste and margarine; what a welcome change it would be to advertise the United States.
Many of the agencies which competed for the account were able
to bring political influence to bear; I had none. Nevertheless we got
on the short list of six, and were invited to make a presentation in
Washington. Assistant Secretary of Commerce William Ruder—in
private life a fellow denizen of Madison Avenue— subjected me to a
merciless cross-examination which exposed the one weakness in my
case: a lack of branch offices in foreign countries.
After making more than a hundred new-business presentations,
I have come to know by the end of the meeting whether I have won
or lost. That afternoon I knew that I had lost, and I returned to New
York in despair. Ten days went by, and no announcement was made.
I was comforted by my staff, and we laid bets on which of our competitors would win. Then one Saturday morning I was awakened by
Western Union: the Secretary of Commerce had appointed Ogilvy,
Benson & Mather to do the “Visit U.S.A.” advertising in Britain,
France, and Germany.
This was the most glorious telegram I had received since Oxford telegraphed the news of my scholarship at Christ Church thirty
years before. Every advertisement I write for the U. S. Travel Service is a bread-and-butter letter from a grateful immigrant.
Before our campaign broke I warned the Department of Commerce that it was bound to attract criticism:
The crunch will come when our first advertisement appears.
Whatever the advertisements say or don’t say, we are going to be
subjected to criticism. I know this from long experience with the
British travel advertising.
But in the last analysis, our campaign can only be defended or
attacked on the basis of results.
Research had revealed that our greatest single obstacle lay in
the fact that Europeans had an exaggerated concept of the cost of
visiting the U.S.A. We decided to attack the problem head-on. Instead of saying in a bland, innocuous way that you can tour America
“for less than you suppose,” we gave a specific figure: 35 pounds a
week. This was arrived at after careful verification. For example, be-

11

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
fore deciding on a reasonable minimum price for a hotel room in
New York, we sent one of our copywriters to check the beds at the
Hotel Winslow, which charges six dollars a night; she found them
satisfactory.
But our critics took the position that 35 pounds a week was far
too low. They were not aware of the realities of the problem:
(1) Travel from Europe had previously been confined to businessmen with expense accounts, and the very rich. It was vitally important to enlarge the market by attracting tourists with more modest
means. Fort Knox was leaking gold, and foreign exchange was urgently needed.
(2) Whereas more than half the families in the United States
have incomes in excess of $5,000 only 3 per cent of the families in
England have incomes of this magnitude. It was therefore important
to make our product available to them at the lowest possible price;
they could always spend more if they wanted to.
(3) It is better, I argued, for middle-income Europeans to visit
the United States even if they have to economize than not to come at
all; the thrill of seeing New York, San Francisco, and the wide-open
spaces far transcends any hardships involved in economizing. Foreign tourists bring badly needed foreign exchange, and research
shows that almost all of them go home with a more favorable attitude toward the United States.
Our advertisements achieved record-breaking readership when
they appeared in European newspapers, and they produced so many
inquiries that the London, Paris, and Frankfurt offices of the U. S.
Travel Service had to work far into the night.
Our campaign triggered an avalanche of editorial publicity
which was probably without precedent in the history of advertising.
The Daily Mail sent its star feature writer to the United States. In his
first dispatch he cabled:
At the same time as President Kennedy invited me—and all the
other millions of Europe—to try the novelty of tourism in the U.S.,
he issued a secret directive to 180,000,000 Americans to be nice to
us. How else to explain the embarrassing generosity, the overwhelming kindness, the extreme courtesy at every turn?
The Daily Express instructed its New York correspondent to
write a series of articles on the subject. An editorial in The Manchester Guardian referred to our advertisements as “famous,” after only
three of them had appeared. Handelsblatt, the leading financial
newspaper in Germany, wrote: “This is a very truthful campaign.
The U. S. Travel Service has introduced its advertising to the West
German tourist market with a blare of trumpets.”
The proof of the pudding is in the eating. Eight months after our
campaign started, French tourist traffic to the United States was up
27 per cent, British traffic was up 24 per cent, and German traffic
was up 18 per cent.
In 1956 I participated in an unusual adventure: a joint solicitation with another agency. Ben Sonnenberg persuaded Arthur Fatt of
Grey and myself to solicit the Greyhound Bus account— in tandem.
He specified that 1 was to “upgrade the image of bus travel,” while
Grey was to “put arses on the seats.”
Fatt and I flew to San Francisco, where the Greyhound people
were holding a convention. As soon as we had checked into our hotel, he showed me his presentation. His research department had
penetrated to the heart of the problem, and his copywriters had developed a slogan which hit the nail on the head—It’s such a common
to take the bus and leave The driving to us. )
Forthwith I called the Greyhound advertising manager on the
house phone, and invited him to join me in Fatt’s room.

“Arthur Fatt has just shown me his half of our joint presentation. It is the best I have ever seen. I advise you to give your whole
account to Grey. To make your decision easier, I am now returning
to New York.”
I then left the room, and Grey was appointed.
I have never wanted to get an account so big that I could not afford to lose it. The day you do that, you commit yourself to living
with fear. Frightened agencies lose the courage to give candid advice; once you lose that you become a lackey.
This was what lead me to refuse an invitation to compete for the
Edsel account. I wrote to Ford: “Your account would represent onehalf of our total billing. This would make it difficult for us to sustain
our independence of counsel.” If we had entered the Edsel contest,
and if we had won it, Ogilvy, Benson & Mather would have gone
down the drain with Edsel.
We take immense pains to select our clients. It is true that we
have selected a few clients who have not yet selected us, but we persevere in their pursuit, and we turn down an average of fifty-nine
less desirable accounts every year.
It is not generally realized that there aren’t enough first-class
agencies to go around. For example, when the soap manufacturers
have roped off their twenty-one agencies, there are only two left
which could meet their standards.
My ambition is to add one new client every two years. Faster
growth would force us to engage new staff faster than we could train
them, and to divert too much of our best brain power from the service of our old clients to the difficult work involved in planning the
first campaigns for new ones. I seek accounts which meet ten criteria:
{1) The product must be one which we would be proud to advertise. On those few occasions when we have advertised products
which we privately despised, we have failed. A lawyer may be able
to defend a murderer whom he knows to be guilty, and a surgeon
may be able to operate on a man he dislikes, but professional detachment doesn’t work in advertising. Some measure of personal
commitment is required before a copywriter can sell a product.
(2) I never accept an account unless I believe that we can do a
conspicuously better job than the previous agency. When The New
York Times asked us to do their advertising, I declined, because I
didn’t think we could produce better advertisements than the brilliant
ones they had been running.
(3) I steer clear of products whose sales have been falling over
a long period, because this almost always means that there is an intrinsic weakness in the product, or that the management of the company is incompetent. No amount of good advertising can make up
for either of these deficiencies.
However hungry a new agency may be, it must have the selfrestraint to turn down moribund accounts. A surgeon with an established practice can afford to have an occasional patient die on the
operating table, but a young surgeon’s whole career can be ruined by
such a misadventure. I used to dread having one of our accounts die
on our operating table.
(4) It is important to find out whether the prospective client
wants his agency to make a profit. I have had the galling experience
of helping to make clients into multimillionaires while losing my
shirt in their service. The average profit made by advertising agencies is now less than half of one per cent. We tread a narrow knifeedge, poised between overservicing our clients and going broke, or
underservicing them and getting fired.

12

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
(5) If the account is unlikely to be profitable, would it give you
a chance to create remarkable advertising? We never made much
profit on Guinness or Rolls-Royce, but they gave us golden opportunities to demonstrate our creative excellence. There is no quicker
way to put a new agency on the map. The only danger is that it gives
you a lopsided reputation. The business world assumes that if a
small agency demonstrates a genius for creating great advertisements, it must be weak in research and marketing. It seldom occurs
to people that if you set high standards in one department, you are
likely to set high standards in every department.
(I myself was soon type-cast as a good copywriter, but an ignoramus in every other department. This irritated me, because my long
suit was not copy at all, but research; I had run the Audience Research Institute for Dr. Gallup.
The biggest problem which besets almost every agency is the
problem of producing good campaigns. Copywriters, art directors,
and television producers are easily come by, but the number of men
who can preside over an agency’s entire creative output—perhaps a
hundred new campaigns every year—can be numbered on the fingers of one hand. These rare trumpeter swans must be capable of inspiring a motley crew of writers and artists; they must be sure-footed
judges of campaigns for a wide range of different products; they
must be good presenters; and they must have a colossal appetite for
midnight oil.
Word got around that I was one of these rare birds, and it occurred to several of the big agencies that they should hire me, even if
they had to take my whole agency to get me. In a period of three
years I received such offers from J. Walter Thompson, McCannErickson, BBDO, Leo Burnett, and five other agencies. If it had occurred to any of them to woo me with gold, I would have succumbed. But they all made the mistake of assuming that I was more
interested in “creative challenge,” whatever that may be.)
A lopsided reputation for creativity disqualifies an agency from
getting big accounts. But it is something you must risk if you are
ever going to escape from obscurity. It wasn’t until Esty Stowell
joined us in 1957 that our agency began to acquire a reputation for
strength in all departments. He had been Executive Vice President of
Benton & Bowles, which was widely regarded as the best of all
agencies in the marketing area. He was the symbol we required to
offset my reputation as a mere copywriter; he was also a very able
man. With a sigh of relief I turned over to him the management of
every department in the agency except the creative departments.
From that point on our agency began to grow in bigger chunks,
(6) The relationship between a manufacturer and his advertising agency is almost as intimate as the relationship between a patient
and his doctor. Make sure that you can live happily with your prospective client before you accept his account.
When a prospective client comes to see me for the first time, I
start by finding out why he wants to change agencies. If I have reason to suspect that he has been resigned, I ask a friend in his previous agency. Only recently I discovered in the nick of time that a prospective client had been resigned; his previous agency told me that
he needed a psychiatrist more than an agency.
(7) I avoid clients for whom advertising is only a marginal factor in their marketing mix. They have an awkward tendency to raid
their advertising appropriations whenever they need cash for other
purposes. I prefer clients for whom advertising is the breath of life.
We then find ourselves operating at the indispensable heart of our
client’s business, instead of on the frivolous fringe.

On the whole, the most lucrative accounts are products of low
unit cost, universal use, and frequent purchase. They generate larger
budgets, and more opportunities for testing, than high-priced durables.
(8) I never take new products, before they have emerged from
the laboratory, unless they are included in a hamper with another
product which has already reached national distribution. It costs an
agency more to steer a new product through test markets than to
handle a going product, and eight out of ten new products die in test
markets. With an over-all profit margin of one-half of one per cent,
we cannot afford this risk.
(9) If you aspire to produce great advertising, never take associations as clients. Some years ago, we were invited to compete for
the Rayon Manufacturers’ Association account. I duly presented myself at their headquarters and was ushered into a pompous committee
room.
“Mr. Ogilvy,” said the chairman, “we are interviewing several
agencies. You have exactly fifteen minutes to plead your case. Then
I will ring this bell, and the representative of the next agency, who is
already waiting outside, will follow you.”
Before launching into my pitch, I asked three questions: “How
many of the end-uses for rayon must be covered in your campaign?”
Answer: automobile tires, furnishing fabrics, industrial products,
women’s clothing, men’s clothing. “How much money is available?”
Answer: $600,000. “How many people must OK the advertisements?” Answer: the twelve members of the Committee, representing twelve manufacturers. “Ring the bell!” I said, and walked out.
Them’s the conditions what prevail with almost all association accounts. Too many masters, too many objectives, too little money.
(10) Sometimes a prospective client offers you business on condition that you hire an individual whom he believes to be indispensable to the management of his advertising. The agencies which play
this game wind up with a crew of politicians who cock snooks at
their plans board, ignore their copy chief, and blackmail their management. I have sometimes hired able men on condition that they did
not bring their vest-pocket accounts with them.
However thoroughly you investigate prospective clients, it is
almost impossible to find out whether they qualify on all these
counts until you meet them face to face. You then find yourself in a
delicate position, simultaneously selling your agency and eliciting
from the prospect enough information about himself and his product
to decide whether you want his account. It pays to listen more than
you talk.
In early days I sometimes made the mistake of not exhibiting
sufficient enthusiasm for the account I was soliciting. My style was
too diffident. Thus when Ted Moscoso, the brilliant head of Puerto
Rico’s Operation Bootstrap, first came to see me, he went away with
the impression that it was a matter of indifference to me whether he
hired us or not. It took me a long time to convince him that I really
wanted to work for Puerto Rico.
Shortly after our appointment as the agency for Puerto Rico, I
wrote to Moscoso:
We must substitute a lovely image of Puerto Rico for the
squalid image which now exists in the minds of most main-landers.
This is of cardinal importance to your industrial development, your
rum industry, your tourism and your political evolution.
What is Puerto Rico? What is the personality of this island?
What face shall Puerto Rico show to the world? Is Puerto Rico no
more than a backward country in the throes of its industrial revolution? Is the island to remain what Max Ascoli calls “the Formosa of

13

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
the New Dealers”? Is it in the process of becoming a latterday North
Philadelphia? Or is there a soul alive in the body economic?
Is Puerto Rico to be overrun by vulgar tourists, and changed
into a second-class Miami Beach? Have Puerto Ri-cans forgotten
their Spanish heritage in a mad rush to prove how American they
are?
These imminent tragedies need not be. And one of the surest
ways to prevent them is to start a long-range advertising campaign
that will present Puerto Rico to the world in the image which inspires us all—an image of Puerto Rico in renaissance.
Ted Moscoso and Governor Munoz accepted this proposal, and
we launched the campaign which is still running, nine years later. It
has had a profound effect on the fortunes of Puerto Rico. It is, I believe, the only instance of an advertising campaign changing the image of a country.
One day in 1959, Moscoso and I were lunching with Beardsley
Ruml and Elmo Roper at the Century. Walking me back to my office, Moscoso said, “David, you’ve been doing our Puerto Rico advertising for five years. This afternoon I’m going to telephone all
your other clients and invite them to join me in a proposition: if you
will stop soliciting new clients, we will promise never to fire you.
Wouldn’t you like to devote all your energy to the clients you already have, and stop wasting your time in the pursuit of new ones?”
I was sorely tempted to encourage this novel proposal. Landing
new clients is exciting, but each one increases my load of homework; eighty hours a week are enough. But my younger partners
were hungry for new challenges. What’s more, even the best agencies lose accounts. Sometimes it happens that clients sell their companies; sometimes they hire bullies to manage their advertising, and
I always resign from the service of bullies. So, if you stop adding
new clients, you start bleeding to death. (But this doesn’t mean that
you have to follow Ben Duffy’s example. When he was head of
BBDO he took every new account that was offered, and wound up
with 167; the pressure almost killed him. Stanley Resor was the opposite. In his first year as head of J. Walter Thompson he resigned a
hundred accounts, unprofitable undergrowth. That was his first step
in making JWT the biggest agency in the world.)
A posture of enthusiasm is not always the one best calculated to
succeed. Five or six times I have turned down accounts which did
not meet our qualifications, only to find that the act of rejection inflamed the client’s desire to hire our agency. When a famous Swiss
watch manufacturer offered us his account, we declined, because his
advertisements had to be approved not only by headquarters in Switzerland but also by the American importer, and no advertising agent
can serve two masters. But instead of declining in a straightforward
way, I said that we would accept the account if we were paid 25 per
cent instead of the usual 15 per cent commission. The client
promptly agreed.
Sometimes a manufacturer in search of a new agency releases to
the newspapers the names of the agencies he is considering. When-

ever we are revealed as one of the suitors, I withdraw from the contest; it is unwise to risk being publicly defeated. I like to succeed in
public, but to fail in secret.
I avoid contests in which more than four other agencies are involved. The ritual of competitive courtship requires a series of long
meetings. A hot agency finds itself on the shopping list of almost
every prospective client, and it is all too easy for its top man to fritter
away his time in this way. We have other fish to fry—the fish of our
present clients.
The most desirable courtship is the kind which involves no
other agency. This is becoming increasingly rare, because corporate
men now seem to think it naughty to hire a new agency without
comparing the merits of several. In Chapter IV I will offer them free
advice on the right way to go about selecting a new agency.
Most agencies send large delegations to present their case to
prospective clients. The head of the agency limits his own participation to introducing a series of subordinates, who take turns haranguing the prospect. I have always preferred to make the presentation
myself. The final choice of agency is almost always made by the
head of the client company, and chairmen should be harangued by
chairmen.
I have also found that frequent changes of speaker lead to confusion with the other agencies which are competing for the account.
One orchestra looks like every other orchestra, but there is no confusing one conductor with another. When we were invited to solicit
the Sears, Roebuck account I bearded their board of directors by myself. Sophisticated corporations are seldom deceived by a show of
bodies. The agencies with the best record in new-business solicitation rely on their leader to put on solo performances. (When you
consider the repulsive personalities of many of these soloists, you
are forced to conclude that singularity is an important ingredient in
winning accounts.)
I always tell prospective clients about the chinks in our armor. I
have noticed that when an antique dealer draws my attention to flaws
in a piece of furniture, he wins my confidence.
What are the chinks in our armor? The two most important are
these:
We have no Public Relations department. I take the view that
public relations should be handled by the manufacturer himself, or
by specialist counsel.
We have never produced a television spectacular. I have a phobia for these extravaganzas; with rare exceptions they cost too much
in relation to the size of the audience they deliver.
Try as I may, I have never been able to space the acquisition of
new accounts at convenient intervals. For months on end, nothing
happens. I begin to wonder if we will ever get another account. My
staff becomes despondent. Then we get three beauties in rapid succession, and the load of urgent work becomes unbearable. The only
solution is to build a waiting list of would-be clients, and to admit
them one by one at times of our own choosing. That will be the day.

14

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man

III
How to Keep Clients

THE seven-year itch is not confined to matrimony. It also afflicts the relationship between advertising agents and their clients.
The average client changes agencies once every seven years. He gets
bored with his agency, much as a gourmet gets bored with the repertoire of his chef.
Winning a new account is a heady experience, but losing one is
pure hell. What do you do to convince your other clients that they
too should not dismiss you? I have seen two large agencies collapse
after one defecting client started a run on the bank; it is a sickening
spectacle.
What does the agency president do about his conscience when
he knows that it was his own fault that his agency lost the ac-V
count? How can he, in common decency, fire the people who
worked on the account and did their best to offset his own stupidity?
Some of them may be men of rare ability, and he will need them to
work on the next new account he brings in. But can he afford to keep
them on ice? Generally not. I have seen agencies fire a hundred people when they have lost a single account; and some of those poor
devils were too old to get another job. This is one reason why agencies have to pay such high salaries; next to the theater, advertising is
probably the least secure of all careers.
If you aspire to manage an agency, you must accept the fact that
you are always going to be traveling on the edge of a precipice. If
you are naturally an insecure, frightened person, woe betide you.
You are in for a rough passage.
I envy my friends who are doctors. They have so many patients
that the defection of one cannot ruin them. Nor is the defection reported in the newspapers for all their other patients to read.
I also envy lawyers. They can go on their vacations, safe in the
knowledge that other lawyers are not making love to their clients.
Now that I have acquired a portfolio of nineteen splendid clients, I
wish that a law could be passed making it illegal for agencies to solicit. In Sweden the big agencies have got such a law onto the statute
books, in delightful restraint of trade.
There are certain steps you can take to reduce the turnover. First
and foremost, you can devote your best brains to the service of your
clients, instead of diverting them to the pursuit of new ones. I have
always forbidden my account executives to hunt new clients, because it corrupts them, like playing the horses. They start neglecting
their present clients, and the revolving door starts spinning.
Second, you can avoid hiring unstable, quarrelsome executives.
Madison Avenue is full of masochists who unconsciously provoke
rejection by their clients. I know brilliant men who have lost every
account they have ever handled. And I know pedestrian nonentities

who have a genius for creating relationships of calm stability between the agency and its clients.
Third, you can avoid taking on clients who have a record of firing their agencies at frequent intervals. You may think that you can
cure them of their infidelity, but the odds are against you, as they are
when you marry a much-divorced woman.
Fourth, you can keep in contact with your clients at all their levels. But this is becoming increasingly difficult as the big advertisers
pile level upon level—assistant brand managers reporting to brand
managers, reporting to division heads, reporting to marketing vice
presidents, reporting to executive vice presidents, reporting to presidents, reporting to chairmen—with a battery of consultants, committees, and staff officers heckling the agency from the wings.
It has become the fashion for most corporate chairmen and
presidents to insulate themselves from all contact with their agencies. Mind you, they still make the important decisions with respect
to their advertising, but they never see the agency people face to
face, and their henchmen are often incompetent to serve as gobetweens. Frequently I hear advertising managers quote their presidents as uttering stupidities which I know they could never have
said. And I have no doubt that these same presidents hear me quoted
as saying some pretty silly things. Before you know it, you are fired.
It reminds me of a story told during the First World War. A brigade major sent a verbal message back from the front-line trench to
his divisional headquarters. The message started out as “Send up reinforcements, we are going to advance.” By the time it had been repeated from mouth to mouth through all the levels, it reached headquarters as “Send up three-and-four-pence, we are going to a dance.”
One of the reasons why the top people in big corporations show
this tendency to deal with agencies at arm’s length is that they dislike the whole business of advertising. It is so intangible. When they
build new factories, or issue new stock, or buy raw materials, they
know exactly what they are getting. These propositions are presented
to them cut-and-dried, with all the facts and figures they need to justify their decision to their stockholders. But advertising is still an inexact speculation. As the first Lord Leverhulme (and John Wanamaker after him) complained, “Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted, and the trouble is I don’t know which half.”
Manufacturers who have come up through production or accounting or research are apt to be suspicious of advertising people,
because they are too articulate. That is why some inarticulate dullards have done so well as the heads of agencies: they make their clients feel comfortable.
Another thing you can do to reduce the risk of losing accounts
is to adopt my ice-box policy. As soon as a client has approved a
15

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
new campaign, begin work to develop another one, and put it in test
markets. You will then be ready with a shot in your locker if your
first campaign flops, or incurs the displeasure of your client’s top
management for some more subjective reason. This restless preparation of reserve positions will cut into your profits and exasperate
your copywriters, but it will prolong your tenure of accounts.
I have always tried to sit on the same side of the table as my clients, to see problems through their eyes. I buy shares in their company, so that I can think like a member of their family. When I take a
total view of their business, I am better able to give them sound advice. If they would elect me to their board of directors, it would be
even easier to identify myself with their best interests.
Young eager beavers often have the bright idea of combining
two of their clients in a joint operation. They may suggest that one
client should mount a contest and offer another client’s product as
the prize; or that two clients should share an advertisement in magazines. This doubling-up can be dangerous to the agency; almost invariably one of the clients will feel that he has got the short end of
the stick. When you try to umpire disputes between clients, you end
up with a bloody nose. I was brought up to keep my clients apart.
The only time the head of Hathaway met the head of Schweppes was
when they went to buy a Rolls-Royce on the same morning.
I never tell one client that I cannot attend his sales convention
because I have a previous engagement with another client; successful polygamy depends upon pretending to each spouse that she is the
only pebble on your beach. If one client asks me what results I have
been getting with a campaign for another client, I change the subject.
This may irritate him, but if I were to give him the information he
asks, he would probably conclude that I would be equally indiscreet
with his secrets. Once a client loses confidence in your discretion,
you’ve had it.
Sometimes a client hires an advertising manager who is so in-1
competent that you have to denounce him. But I have only done this
twice in fifteen years. In one case the man was a psychotic whom I
had fired six months before. In the other case he was a pathological
liar.
Most reasonable clients seem to regard it as your duty to alert
them when you detect a weak link in the chain of communication between their top management and yours. I was once taken to task by a
client for not warning him that our account executive was ghosting
his brand manager’s marketing plans.
Clients do not hesitate to blackball our account executives.
Sometimes they are right; sometimes they are wrong. In either case
it is better for all concerned to transfer the victim to another job, and
to do it before the smoke bursts into flame and ruptures the whole
agency-client relationship.
One of the most brilliant colleagues I ever had was blackballed
by three clients in one year; the experience hurt him so badly that he
left the agency business forever. If you are too thin-skinned to survive this hazard, you should not become an account executive in an
advertising agency.
I always use my clients’ products. This is not toadyism, but
elementary good manners. Almost everything I consume is manufactured by one of my clients. My shirts are by Hathaway, my candlesticks by Steuben. My car is a Rolls-Royce, and its tank is always
full of Super Shell. I have my suits made by Sears, Roebuck. At
breakfast I drink Maxwell House coffee or Tetley Tea, and eat two
slices of Pepperidge Farm toast. I wash with Dove, deodorize with
Ban, and light my pipe with a Zippo lighter. After sundown I drink
nothing but Puerto Rico rum and Schweppes. I read magazines and

newspapers which are printed on paper from the mills of International Paper. When I go on vacation (in Britain or Puerto Rico) I get
my reservations through American Express and travel by KLM or
P&O-Orient Lines.
And why not, pray tell? Are these not the finest goods and services on earth? I think they are, and that is why I advertise them.
When a client hires our agency, it is because he has decided that
it is the best available to him. His advisers have reached this decision
after making a thorough study of what we have to offer. But as time
goes by, he acquires new advisers. Every time this happens, it is expedient for the agency to convince the new adviser that his predecessor was right in selecting our agency. The new adviser should be
treated as if he were a new business prospect.
With big corporations, this process of reselling the agency never
ends. It is time-consuming and wearisome, but it is vitally important.
New brooms are a constant threat to the stability of agency-client relationships.
The most dangerous thing that can happen to an agency is to
depend on a single personal tie with a client company. If the president of a large manufacturing organization hires your agency because he likes your president, you must take urgent steps to forge
ties at lower levels. Only when the agency is wired in at every level
can you hope for tenure.
I do not believe in restricting contact with the client to the account executives. It works better to have people from your service
departments—research, media, copy, art, television production, merchandising, and so on—get to know your client. This sometimes presents comic problems, because our backroom boys are not always
remarkable for their tact, and some of them are unimpressive in their
persons. It takes a client of rare perception to recognize that a
tongue-tied hobbledehoy may be capable of writing a commercial
which will double his sales.

***
It is difficult for a doctor to tell a patient that he is suffering
from a serious disease, and it is equally difficult to tell a client that
his product has a serious fault. I have known clients who resent such
candor more than they would resent criticism of their wives. A
manufacturer’s pride in his product almost always blinds him to its
shortcomings. But the time comes in the life of every advertising
agent when he must grasp this nettle. I confess that I am no good at
it. When I told one client that I had doubts about the consistency of
his spaghetti, his reaction was to question whether I could do a good
job for any product which I disliked; we lost the account. On the
whole, however, I have observed an increasing tendency on the part
of clients to welcome candor, particularly when it is based on the results of consumer research.
The head of an agency has so much on his plate that he is apt to
see his clients only at times of crisis. This is a mistake. If you get
into the habit of seeing clients when the weather is calm, you will
establish an easy relationship which may save your life when a storm
blows up.
It is important to admit your mistakes, and to do so before you
are charged with them. Many clients are surrounded by buck-passers
who make a fine art of blaming the agency for their own failures. I
seize the earliest opportunity to assume the blame.
Come to think of it, we have resigned three times as many clients as we have been fired by. I will not allow my staff to be bullied

16

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
by tyrants, and I will not run a campaign dictated by a client unless I
believe in its basic soundness. When you do that, you imperil the
creative reputation of your agency, which ought to be your most
treasured possession. In 1954 I made this very mistake. My friend
Jerry Babb at Lever Brothers was insisting that we advertise the old
Rinso soap powder and the new Rinso Blue detergent in the same
advertisements. A study of the precedents had taught me that it
doesn’t pay to advertise two products in one advertisement, particularly when one of them is new and the other is obsolescent. Even
worse, Jerry instructed me to inject a note of whimsical gaiety into
the campaign.
For several weeks I tried to sell him the kind of serious campaign which had proved successful for Tide and other detergents, but
Jerry was adamant. Storm signals were hoisted. His right-hand man
warned me that unless I did as I was told, I would lose the account.
In the end, I capitulated. It took me two hours and a pint of Puerto
Rican rum to write the silliest copy in the history of advertising. It
was in verse, to be sung to the tune of “Boys and Girls Come Out to
Play”:
Rinso White or Rinso Blue?
Soap or detergent—it’s up to you!
Both wash whiter and brighter than new,
The choice, dear lady, is up to you!
This dreadful doggerel duly appeared. I lost more face than I
could afford; my staff thought that I had gone mad, and the working
levels at Lever Brothers concluded that I had no conception of what
kind of advertising was required to persuade housewives to buy a detergent. Six months later we were fired, and deserved to be.
Nor did the mischief end there. For several years afterward I
found it impossible to get any serious marketing man to join Ogilvy,
Benson & Mather until I had told him that my opinion of my idiotic
Rinso campaign was as low as his own.
This episode taught me that it does not pay to appease clients on
matters of grand strategy. One Munich was enough.
I also resign accounts when they are unprofitable to my agency.
This happened with Reed & Barton. Our commissions were not big
enough to pay for the services which were required, and Roger Hallowell, who managed this fine old family business, was unwilling to
make good the losses we were incurring. I liked Roger and all his
colleagues at Reed & Barton, but I was not prepared to trade with
them indefinitely at a loss. I believe that they made a mistake in allowing us to resign; we had made an important contribution to their
profits by showing them how to pretest new patterns for sterling
flatware. It costs $500,000 to launch a new pattern, and no male executive can predict what patterns will appeal to nineteen-year-old
brides.
I also resign accounts when I lose confidence in the product. It
is flagrantly dishonest for an advertising agent to urge consumers to
buy a product which he would not allow his own wife to buy.
Frank Hummert, who succeeded Claude Hopkins as copy chief
of Lord & Thomas and then made a fortune as the inventor of soap
operas, once told me: “All clients are pigs. You may start by thinking otherwise, but you will change your mind.”
This has not been my experience. I have encountered a handful
of pigs and I have resigned them. But with a very few exceptions, I
have loved my clients. If I hadn’t become his advertising agent, I
would never have made friends with Ted Moscoso, the great Puerto

Rican who became American Ambassador to Venezuela and head of
the Alliance for Progress.
If I hadn’t landed the Steuben Glass account, I would never
have made friends with Arthur Houghton. It was a great day for me
when I realized that I had acquired as a client the foremost patron of
contemporary artists in the history of industry, an eminent authority
on rare books, and the most imaginative of philanthropists.
My list of clients who became dear friends is a long one. Ellerton Jette of Hathaway enriched my life by getting me elected to the
Board of Trustees at Colby College. Sir Colin Anderson of P&OOrient Lines is the only client I have ever had who is equally expert
at Scottish dancing and embroidery. Commander Whitehead of
Schweppes started out as a client and became one of my closest
companions. We have been shipwrecked together, and our wives
solace each other by comparing notes on their husbands’ vanities.
Helena Rubinstein has always fascinated me. This tiny Polish
beauty started her career in Australia in the nineteenth century, and
made a profit of £30,000 when she was eighteen years old. By the
time she discovered me, she had become a matriarch, in control of
companies all over the world. In the office she is a terror, but she
also has an irresistible sense of humor. A hundred times I have seen
her, in the middle of an otherwise grim meeting, so convulsed by
laughter that the tears ran down her cheeks. As a friend, she is an enchanting combination of gaiety and generosity.
Another thing I admire in Madame Rubinstein is her lack of
pretense; she is as remarkable as she looks, and no pretense is
needed. That is what Graham Sutherland captured in his portrait of
her.
Some agencies pander to the craze for doing everything in
committee. They boast about “teamwork” and decry the role of the
individual. But no team can write an advertisement, and I doubt
whether there is a single agency of any consequence which is not the
lengthened shadow of one man.
Clients sometimes ask me what would become of our agency if
I were run over by a taxicab. It would change. When Senator Benton
and Governor Bowles left their agency, it changed—for the better. J.
Walter Thompson survived the departure of Mr. Thompson.
McCann-Erickson hit its stride after Harry McCann retired. Even the
retirement of Raymond Rubicam, who was probably the best agency
head in history, failed to arrest the progress of Young & Rubicam.
Like a midwife, I make my living bringing new babies into the
world, except that mine are new advertising campaigns. Once or
twice a week I go into our Delivery Room and preside over what is
known as a Presentation. These awesome ceremonies are attended
by six or seven of my henchmen and notables from the client’s official family. The atmosphere is electric. The client knows that he is
going to be asked to approve a campaign which will cost millions.
The agency has invested much time and treasure in preparing its offering.
At my agency we always rehearse our presentations before our
Plans Board, on which sit our senior senators. They are sterner critics than any client I have so far encountered, and their criticisms are
expressed in rougher language. By the time a campaign has passed
their scrutiny, it is apt to be good.
But however well-documented our presentation may be, however thoroughly our planners have assessed the marketing realities,
and however brilliantly our copywriters have done their work, horrible things can happen at The Presentation. If it begins early in the
morning, the client may have a hangover. On one occasion I made

17

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
the mistake of presenting a new campaign to Sam Bronfman of Seagram after luncheon. He fell sound asleep, and awoke in such a poisonous humor that he rejected the campaign on which we had been
working for several months.
Bronfman disliked the convention which most agencies observe
of using several spokesmen to make their presentations. So do I. It is
less distracting to the audience if one man does all the talking. He
should be the most persuasive advocate available, and he should be
so thoroughly briefed that he can stand up under cross-examination.
I make more presentations than most agency heads, partly because I fancy myself as an advocate, and partly because I believe
that there is no better way of demonstrating to the client that the
head of the agency is personally involved in his affairs. I wonder if
any barrister has to spend as many nights as I do preparing for the
Presentations which succeed each other with such remorseless regularity.
It pays to take immense pains in preparing the plans you present
to clients. They should be written with the maximum lucidity and the
least possible mannerism. They should be laced with irrefutable
facts.
But there are still a few clients who do not like their agencies to
present advertisements in the context of a well-documented plan.
They enjoy appraising layouts in a vacuum, as if they were selecting
pictures for an exhibition. Sir Frederic Hooper of Schweppes belongs to this school. The first time I presented a marketing plan to
him, he quickly became bored. He had been looking forward to a diverting half-hour of literary criticism, and found himself being subjected to a tedious recitation of marketing facts. On page 19 of my
presentation I came to a statistic that contradicted one of his basic
assumptions. “Ogilvy,” he thundered, “your statistical approach to
advertising is positively babyish.”
I wondered what effect this compliment would have on the statisticians who had prepared our plan. But I stuck to my guns, and five
years later Sir Frederic made an amende honorable when he invited
me to address an advertising convention over which he was to preside. He suggested that I take as my text a conclusion at which he
had recently arrived: “In the end, clients are grateful to advertising
agents who tell them the truth.” By that time Schweppes’ sales in the
United States had increased 517 per cent. We lived happily ever after.
Another client who did not want to be confused with facts complained to me with the utmost gravity, “David, the trouble with your
agency is that it contains too many people with objective minds.”
The best tool ever devised for explaining complicated plans to
committees is the flip-over easel, which the presenter reads aloud. It
has the effect of riveting the attention of everyone in the room on
what you are saying. Here I have some advice to offer. It may sound
trivial, but it can be crucial to the success of the presentation: as you
read aloud, never depart from your printed text by a single word.
The trick lies in assaulting your audience simultaneously through
their eyes and their ears. If they see one set of words, and hear a different set, they become confused and inattentive.

I still die a thousand deaths before every presentation. I am particularly nervous about the impact of my English accent.
How can an American manufacturer possibly have any confidence in the ability of a foreigner to influence the behavior of
American housewives? In my heart I know that my years with Dr.
Gallup at Princeton gave me more insight into the habits and mentality of the American consumer than most native copywriters can
bring to bear, and I always hope that this will become apparent as
my presentation unfolds. I therefore open with axioms which nobody
can question. By the time the audience grows accustomed to my accent, I launch into more controversial judgments.
The first time I allowed a member of my staff to present one of
my campaigns to a client, I knew that my presence at the meeting
would increase his nervousness. So I concealed myself in the next
room and observed his performance through a peephole. His name
was Garret Lydecker, and he performed better than I have ever done,
before or since.
Nowadays I have several partners who are first-class presenters,
and I no longer hesitate to attend their presentations. They have
learned to preserve their equanimity, even when I heckle them. In
the discussion which follows, we hammer out a position which was
neither the client’s nor the agency’s at the beginning of the meeting.
The result is a feeling of comradeship, cutting across the lines which
traditionally keep agency and client on opposite sides of the table.
In some agencies the account executives are allowed to boss the
creative people. This makes a good impression on some clients; they
believe that their advertising is safer in the hands of “business” men.
But it creates an atmosphere which inhibits copywriters, and the client winds up with second-rate advertising. In other agencies the account executives are little more than waiters who carry confections
from the campaign-builders to the clients. They are forbidden to accept the slightest modification which the client may propose without
referring back to headquarters. Denied the authority to exercise their
own judgment, they end up as errand boys.
I deplore both systems. I have able copywriters, and they work
in tandem with able account executives who are empowered to negotiate with clients. The account executives are sufficiently mature to
manage every phase of their accounts without challenging the ultimate suzerainty of the copywriter. It is a delicate balance, and I
know of only one other agency which has ever achieved it.
The marketing plans coming out of our agency today are more
professional, more objective, and better documented than the plans I
used to write in our early days. But some of them are written in a
business lingo which makes me squirm—percentagewise, importantly, mitigate against, maximize, and so on. As a boy I was obliged
to learn twelve verses of the Bible by heart before breakfast every
morning, and I read Latin from the age of nine. At Oxford I came
under the influence of dons who rejected the German school of
scholarship—dry-as-dust, humorless, and unreadable. I was taught to
admire not Mommsen, but Gibbon, Macaulay, and Trevelyan, who
wrote to be read. This kind of training did not equip me to read the
turgid documents which are my homework today. American businessmen are not taught that it is a sin to bore your fellow creatures.

18

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man

IV
How to Be a Good Client

ONE of the biggest advertisers in the world recently engaged an
illustrious firm of management engineers to study the relationship
between his advertising and his profit. The statistician who made the
study fell into a trap which is curiously common: he assumed that
the only significant variable was the amount of money spent on advertising from year to year. He was not aware that a million dollars’
worth of effective advertising can sell more than ten million dollars’
worth of ineffective advertising.
Mail-order advertisers have found that a mere change of headline can increase sales ten times; and I have seen television commercials sell five times as much of a product as other commercials written by the same man.
I know of a brewer who sells more of his beer to the people who
never see his advertising than to the people who see it every week.
Bad advertising can unsell a product.
Sometimes the responsibility for such catastrophes rests on the
agency, but often it is the client who is to blame. Clients get the advertising they deserve. I have worked for ninety-six of them, and
have had unique opportunities for comparing their attitudes and procedures. Some behave so badly that no agency could produce effective advertising for them. Some behave so well that no agency could
fail to do so.
In this chapter, I will set down the fifteen rules which I would
obey in dealing with my agency if I became a client. They are calculated to extract the best service.
(1) Emancipate your agency from fear.
Most agencies run scared, most of the time. This is partly because many of the people who gravitate to the agency business are
naturally insecure, and partly because many clients make it unmistakably plain that they are always on the lookout for a new agency.
Frightened people are powerless to produce good advertising.
After I resigned the Rolls-Royce account, I invited myself to
visit the Ford Motor Company, “to get acquainted.” To his everlasting credit, the advertising manager of Ford refused to receive me. He
said: “Detroit is a small town. If you come to visit me, you would be
seen. Our present agencies would hear about it, and they might be
alarmed. I don’t want to alarm them.”
If I were a client, I would do everything in my power to emancipate my agencies from fear, even to the extent of giving them longterm contracts.
My friend Clarence Eldridge has worked on both sides of the
fence. After distinguishing himself as Chairman of the Plans Board
at Young & Rubicam, he went on to become Vice President in
charge of marketing for General Foods and later Senior Vice Presi-

dent of Campbell Soup Company. This judicious connoisseur of client-agency relationships came to believe that “there is one word
which characterizes the ideal relationship: PERMANENCY . . . If
permanency is to be achieved, it must be in the minds of the parties
from the very beginning. It must be deliberately and consciously
built into the relationship.”
Arthur Page employed N. W. Ayer as the agency for American
Telephone & Telegraph. Every now and then he would become disenchanted with Ayer’s service, but instead of firing the agency, as
most clients would have done, he summoned the head of Ayer and
asked him to put things right. As a result, the AT&T advertising was
never jolted by those dislocations which always accompany the appointment of a new agency. One Ayer man, George Cecil, wrote the
AT&T copy for thirty years, and succeeded in building an image so
favorable that it made a monopoly popular in a country which has no
love for monopolies. Arthur Page was a wise client.
Advertising agencies make convenient scapegoats. It is easier to
fire your agency than to admit to your stockholders that there is
something wrong with your product or your management. However,
before you fire your agency, ask yourself these questions:
(A) Procter & Gamble and General Foods get superlative service out of their agencies, and they have never fired an agency. Why
not?
(B) Will the appointment of a new agency solve your problem,
or merely sweep it under the rug? What are the real roots of your
problem?
(C) Has your product been made obsolete by your competitors?
(D) Did you dictate the advertising for which you now blame
your agency?
(E) Have you been scaring your agency into a blue funk?
(F) Is your advertising manager such a jackass that he would
negate the best brains in any agency?
(G) How do you feel about one of your competitors inheriting
the secrets which your agency has acquired in your service?
(H) Do you realize that a change in agencies may disrupt your
marketing operation for twelve months or more?
(I) Have you been candid with the head of your agency? If you
told him of your dissatisfaction, he might well be able to wheel up
guns with greater fire power than you could find in a new agency. (J)
Have you faced the fact that when you dismiss an agency, you cause
most of the men and women who work on your account to lose their
jobs? Is there no way to avoid this human tragedy?
Several times I have advised manufacturers who wanted to hire
our agency to stay where they were. For example, when the head of
19

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
Hallmark Cards sent emissaries to sound me out, I said to them,
“Your agency has contributed much to your fortunes. It would be an
act of gross ingratitude to appoint another agency. Tell them exactly
what it is about their service which you now find unsatisfactory. I
am sure they will put it right. Stay where you are.” Hallmark took
my advice.
When one of the can companies invited us to solicit their account, I said, “Your agency has been giving you superb service, in
circumstances of notorious difficulty. I happen to know that they
lose money on your account. Instead of firing them, reward them.”
One of the young Can executives bridled. “Mr. Ogilvy, that is
the most impudent thing I have ever heard anyone say.” But his colleagues decided that I was right.
When the Glass Container Manufacturers Institute asked us to
compete for their account, I urged them to stay with Kenyon & Eckhardt, who had been giving them excellent advertising. They ignored
my advice.
(2) Select the right agency in the first place.
If you spend large sums of your stockholders’ money on advertising, and if your profits are dependent on its efficiency, it is your
duty to take great pains to find the best possible agency.
Amateurs do it by cajoling a group of agencies into submitting
free campaigns, on speculation. The agencies which win these contests are the ones which use their best brains for soliciting new accounts; they relegate their clients to their second-best brains. If I
were a manufacturer, I would look for an agency which had no newbusiness department. The best agencies don’t need them; they get all
the business they can handle without preparing speculative campaigns.
The sensible way to pick an agency is to employ an advertising
manager who knows enough about what is going on in the advertising world to have an informed judgment. Ask him to show you representative advertisements and commercials from the three or four
agencies he believes to be best qualified for your account.
Then call some of their clients on the telephone. This can be
particularly revealing when you call advertisers like Procter & Gamble, Lever, Colgate, General Foods, and Bristol-Myers, who employ
several agencies; they can give you cross-bearings on most of the top
agencies.
Then invite the chief executive from each of the leading contenders to bring two of his key men to dine at your house. Loosen
their tongues. Find out if they are discreet about the secrets of their
present clients. Find out if they have the spine to disagree when you
say something stupid. Observe their relationship with each other; are
they professional colleagues or quarrelsome politicians? Do they
promise you results which are obviously exaggerated? Do they
sound like extinct volcanoes, or are they alive? Are they good listeners? Are they intellectually honest?
Above all, find out if you like them; the relationship between
client and agency has to be an intimate one, and it can be hell if the
personal chemistry is sour.
Don’t make the mistake of assuming that your account will be
neglected in a big agency. The young men at the working levels in
big agencies are often abler and harder-working than the nabobs at
the top. On the other hand, don’t assume that a big agency can give
you more service than a small one. The number of bodies deployed
against your account will be roughly the same in a small agency as
in a big one—about nine bodies for every million dollars you spend.
(3) Brief your agency very thoroughly indeed.

The more your agency knows about your company and your
product, the better job it will do for you. When General Foods hired
our agency to advertise Maxwell House Coffee, they undertook to
teach us the coffee business. Day after day we sat at the feet of their
experts, being lectured about green coffee, and blending, and roasting, and pricing, and the arcane economics of the industry.
Some advertising managers are too lazy or too ignorant to brief
their agencies properly. In such cases we have to dig out the facts by
ourselves. The resulting delay in producing our first campaign demoralizes all concerned.
(4) Do not compete with your agency in the creative area. Why
keep a dog and bark yourself?
Back-seat driving knocks the stuffing out of good creative men;
if you do that, God help you. Make it plain to your advertising manager that the responsibility for creating your campaign belongs not to
him but to the agency, and enjoin him not to dilute their responsibility.
When Ellerton Jette offered us the Hathaway account he said:
“We are about to start advertising. Our account will be less than
$30,000 a year. If you will take it on, I will make you a promise: I
will never change a word of your copy.”
So we took the Hathaway account, and Mr. Jette kept his word.
He never changed a word of our copy. He saddled us with the total
responsibility for his advertising. If our advertising for Hathaway
had failed, the responsibility would have been mine. But it has not
failed. Never has a national brand been built at such a low cost.
(5) Coddle the goose who lays your golden eggs.
Perhaps the most important operation agencies are ever called
upon to perform is to prepare a campaign for a new product which
has not yet emerged from the laboratory. This requires us to create a
total image ab ovo.
As I write I am engaged in just such an operation. It has taken
more than a hundred scientists two years to find out how to make the
product in question; I have been given thirty days to create its personality and plan its launching. If I do my job well, I shall contribute
as much as the hundred scientists to the success of this product.
This is not work for beginners. It calls for vivid imagination,
tempered by marketing acumen; knowledge of the research techniques which should be used to select names, packages, and promises; an ability to peer into the future, when competitors will launch
exactly similar products; and, not least, a genius for writing introductory advertisements. I doubt whether there are more than a dozen
people in the —United States who are qualified by temperament and
experience to perform such an operation; and most clients expect it
to be performed at the agency’s expense. If they would invest half as
much in the creative work of launching new products as they invest
in the technical work of developing them, they would see fewer of
their conceptions abort.
(6) Don’t strain your advertising through too типу levels.
I know one advertiser who makes his agencies clear their campaigns through five different levels in his company, each level having the power to tamper and veto.
This has grave consequences. It can cause leakage of secret information. It ties up able men in an interminable series of unnecessary meetings. It complicates the pristine simplicity of the original
submissions. And, worst of all, it poisons the atmosphere with “creative politics.” The copywriters learn to collect votes by pandering to
the whims of a dozen different executives. When a copywriter be-

20

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
comes a politician, he qualifies for John Webster’s description: “A
politician imitates the Devil, as the Devil imitates a cannon:
wheresoever he comes to do mischief, he comes with his backside
towards you.” (The White Devil, c. 1608).
Much of the messy advertising you see on television today is
the product of committees. Committees can criticize advertisements,
but they should never be allowed to create them.
Most of the campaigns which have built brands to fame and fortune have come from the partnership of two men— a sure-footed
copywriter working in harness with an inspiring client. Such was the
partnership of Gordon Seagrove and Jerry Lambert in building Listerine. And such was the partnership of Ted Moscoso and myself in
advertising Puerto Rico.
When the Seagram people commissioned us to do a campaign
for the Christian Brothers wines, they warned me that the advertisements would have to please not only their chieftain, Sam Bronfman,
but also Brother Cellarmaster and his fellow monks at the Christian
Brothers monastery in the Napa Valley. As a schoolboy I had loved
Daudet’s yarn about Pere Gauchet, the monk who became an alcoholic while experimenting in search of the perfect liqueur. I therefore
decided to make Brother Cellarmaster the hero of our campaign.
Seagram approved, and Brother Cellarmaster himself did not
flinch from assuming the role of an ecclesiastical Commander
Whitehead. But he felt obliged to submit our layouts to the head of
his order in Rome, and that eminent divine turned thumbs down, in
Latin. Shortly afterward one of the American cardinals intervened,
and I was commanded to prepare a campaign “without impact.” This
unusual order took the wind out of my sails, and in due course I
handed in my nunс dimittis. Hydra-headed clients present insoluble
problems.
(7) Make sure that your agency makes a profit.
Your account competes with all the other accounts in your
agency. If it is unprofitable, it is unlikely that the management of the
agency will assign their best men to work on it. And sooner or later
they will cast about for a profitable account to replace yours.
It has become increasingly difficult for agencies to make any
profit at all. On every one hundred dollars spent by agencies on behalf of their clients, they now make an average profit of thirty-four
cents. At this rate, the game is hardly worth the candle.
Experience has taught me that advertisers get the best results
when they pay their agency a flat fee. The conventional 15~per-cent
commission system is an anachronism, particularly on “package”
goods accounts, where the agency is expected to give objective advice on the division of marketing expenditures between commissionable advertising and uncommissionable promotions. It is unrealistic to expect your agency to be impartial when its vested interest
lies wholly in the direction of increasing your commissionable advertising.
It seems to me that the client-agency relationship is most satisfactory when the agency’s emoluments are not related to the amount
of money it can persuade its clients to spend on advertising. I prefer
to be in a position to advise my clients to spend more without their
suspecting my motive. And I like to be in a position to advise clients
to spend less— without incurring the odium of my own stockholders.
I am not afraid of a price war between agencies. A period of
competitive pricing would strengthen the good agencies and put the
poor ones out of business. The whole standard of agency performance would be raised. Good agencies should be paid at a higher rate
than bad ones.

My announcement that Ogilvy, Benson & Mather was prepared
to handle accounts on a fee basis was greeted with approval by many
thoughtful men outside the agency business. The head of McKinsey
& Company wrote, “Your announcement shows real leadership in
attacking publicly an outmoded method of compensation.” Clarence
Eldridge wrote, “You are to be congratulated on the courage to break
with tradition and approach the matter of agency compensation logically and realistically. This represents a major breakthrough.”
But my conversion to the fee system was so unpopular with my
fellow advertising agents that it almost brought about our excommunication from the American Association of Advertising Agencies, on
whose board I was then sitting.
For thirty years this august society had contrived to fix the price
of agency service at 15 per cent, and membership of the Association
had been contingent upon unswerving obedience to the rule. In 1956
the United States Government intervened to forbid its enforcement,
but the tradition remained. Any advertising agent who rejected the
conventional commission arrangement was a cad.
I prophesy that Madison Avenue opinion will change. Indeed, I
expect to be remembered as the heretic who pioneered a course
which conferred professional status on advertising agents.
(8) Don’t haggle with your agency.
If you allow pettifoggers on your staff to haggle with your
agency over payment of its bills, you make a mistake.
If, for example, you are stingy about paying for research, you
will wind up without enough research. Your agency will be forced to
fly blind. This could cost you your company.
If, on the other hand, you volunteer to pay for pretesting commercials, split-running experimental print advertisements, and all the
other apparatus of advertising research, you will make it financially
possible for your agency to experiment in continuous search for
more profitable advertising.
Don’t expect your agency to pay for all the dry holes they drill
on your behalf. If, for example, they produce a television commercial which doesn’t work as well as the storyboard promised, ask
them to try again, at your expense. Television is an infernally difficult medium to use. I have not yet seen a commercial which satisfied
me, but I cannot afford to pay $10,000 of my own money to remake
one.
When we finished producing our first commercial for Vim detergent tablets, a wise man at Lever Brothers said to me, “Can you
think of any ways in which this commercial could be improved?”
I confessed that I could think of nineteen ways. “Well,” he said,
“we are going to spend $4,000,000 on broadcasting this commercial.
I want it to be as powerful as possible. Remake it, and we will pay
for it.” Most clients would have insisted that the agency pay for remaking it, an attitude that encourages agencies to conceal their divine discontent with their botches.
When Arthur Houghton asked us to do the advertising for Steuben, he gave me a crystal-clear directive: “We make the best glass in
the world. Your job is to .make the best advertising.”
I replied, “Making perfect glass is very difficult. Even the Steuben craftsmen produce some imperfect pieces. Your inspectors break
them. Making perfect advertisements is equally difficult.”
Six weeks later I showed him the proof of our first Steuben advertisement. It was in color, and the plates, which had cost f 1,200,
were imperfect. Without demur, Arthur agreed to let me break them
and make a new set. For such enlightened clients it is impossible to
do shoddy work.

21

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
(9) Be candid, and encourage candor.
If you think that your agency is performing badly, or if you
think that a particular advertisement is feeble, don’t beat about the
bush. Speak your mind, loud and clear. Disastrous consequences can
arise when a client pussyfoots in his day-to-day dealings with his
agency.
I do not suggest that you should threaten. Don’t say, “You are
an incompetent mucker, and I will get another agency unless you
come back tomorrow with a great advertisement.” Such brutality
will only paralyze the troops. It is better to say, “What you have just
shown me is not up to your usual high standard. Please take another
crack at it.” At the same time you should explain exactly what you
find inadequate about the submission; don’t leave your agency to
guess.
This kind of candor will encourage your agency to be equally
candid with you. And no partnership can fructify without candor on
both sides.
(10) Set high standards.
Discourage bunting. Make it plain that you expect your agency
to hit home runs, and pour on the praise when they do.
Many clients find it easy to blame their agency when sales go
down, but are niggardly in giving credit to their agency when sales
go up. This is unedifying.
But never let your agency rest on its laurels. Keep urging them
to greater heights. You may have a good campaign going for you.
The day after you first approve it, ask your agency to start searching
for an even better one.
As soon as you find a campaign which tests better than the
campaign you are now running, switch to it. But never give up a
campaign just because you have grown tired of it; housewives don’t
see your advertisements as often as you do.
The best thing is to get a great campaign, and then continue it
for several years. The problem is to find a great campaign. They
don’t grow on every tree, as you would know if you had my job of
producing them.
(11) Test everything.
The most important word in the vocabulary of advertising is
TEST. If you pretest your product with consumers, and pretest your
advertising, you will do well in the marketplace.
Twenty-four out of twenty-five new products never get out of
test markets. Manufacturers who don’t test-market their products incur the colossal cost (and disgrace) of having their products fail on a
national scale, instead of dying inconspicuously and economically in
test markets.
Test your promise. Test your media. Test your headlines and
your illustrations. Test the size of your advertisements. Test your

frequency. Test your level of expenditure. Test your commercials.
Never stop testing, and your advertising will never stop improving.
(12) Hurry.
Most young men in big corporations behave as if profit were not
a function of time. When Jerry Lambert scored his first breakthrough
with Listerine, he speeded up the whole process of marketing by dividing time into months. Instead of locking himself into annual
plans, Lambert reviewed his advertising and his profits every month.
The result was that he made $25,000,000 in eight years, where it
takes most people twelve times as long. In Jerry Lambert’s day, the
Lambert Pharmacal Company lived by the month, instead of by the
year. I commend that course to all advertisers.
(13) Don’t waste time on problem babies.
Most advertisers and their agencies spend too much time worrying about how to revive products which are in trouble, and too little
time worrying about how to make successful products even more
successful. In advertising, it is the mark of a brave man to look unfavorable test results in the face, cut your loss, and move on.
You need not always drop the product. Sometimes you can
make large profits out of “milking.” Very few marketers know how
to milk dying brands. It is like playing a misere hand in whist.
Concentrate your time, your brains, and your advertising money
on your successes. Recognize success when it comes, and pour on
the advertising. Back your winners, and abandon your losers.
(14) Tolerate genius.
Conan Doyle wrote that “mediocrity knows nothing higher than
itself.” My observation has been that mediocre men recognize genius, resent it, and feel compelled to destroy it.
There are very few men of genius in advertising agencies. But
we need all we can find. Almost without exception they are disagreeable. Don’t destroy them. They lay golden eggs.
(15) Don’t underspend.
Says Charlie Mortimer, the head of General Foods and \ that
company’s former advertising manager, “The surest way to overspend on advertising is not to spend enough to do a job properly. It’s
like buying a ticket three-quarters of the way to Europe; you have
spent some money, but you do not arrive.”
I have come to think that nine out of ten advertising budgets are
too small to do the job assigned to them. If your brand generates less
than $2,000,000 a year for advertising, do not attempt continuous national advertising. Pull in your horns. Concentrate what money you
have in your most lucrative markets, or confine your advertising to
one income group. Or give up advertising completely. I hate to admit
it, but there are other roads to fortune.

22

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man

V
How to Build Great Campaigns

WHEN copywriters, art directors, and television producers
come to work in our agency, they are herded into a conference room
and subjected to my Magic Lantern, which tells them how to write
headlines and body copy, how to illustrate advertisements, how to
construct television commercials, and how to select the basic promise for their campaigns. The rules I postulate do not represent my
personal opinions; they are the quintessence of what I have learned
from research.
The recruits react to my lecture in different ways. Some find
comfort and security under the command of a chief who seems to
know what he is talking about. Some are uneasy at the prospect of
working within such rigid disciplines.
“Surely,” they say, “these rules and regulations must result in
dull advertising?”
“Not so far” I reply. And I go on to preach the importance of
discipline in art. Shakespeare wrote his sonnets within a strict discipline, fourteen lines of iambic pentameter, rhyming in three quatrains and a couplet. Were his sonnets dull? Mozart wrote his sonatas
within an equally rigid discipline—exposition, development, and recapitulation. Were they dull?
This argument disarms most of the highbrows. I go on to promise them that if they will subscribe to my principles, they will soon
be producing good advertisements.
What is a good advertisement? There are three schools of
thought. The cynics hold that a good advertisement is an advertisement with a client’s OK on it. Another school accepts Raymond Rubicam’s definition, “The best identification of a great advertisement
is that its public is not only strongly sold by it, but that both the public and the advertising world remember it for a long time as an admirable piece of work.” I have produced my share of advertisements
which have been remembered by the advertising world as “admirable pieces of work,” but I belong to the third school, which holds
that a good advertisement is one which sells the product without
drawing attention to itself. It should rivet the reader’s attention on
the product. Instead of saying, “What a clever advertisement,” the
reader says, “I never knew that before. I must try this product.”
It is the professional duty of the advertising agent to conceal his
artifice. When Aeschines spoke, they said, “How well he speaks.”
But when Demosthenes spoke, they said, “Let us march against
Philip.” I’m for Demosthenes.
If my new recruits boggle at this stern definition of good advertising, I invite them to return to their previous incarnations, there to
flounder in silliness and ignorance.
My next step is to tell them that I will not allow them to use the
word CREATIVE to describe the functions they are to perform in

our agency. The even more fashionable word CREATIVITY is not
in the twelve-volume Oxford Dictionary. It reminds Leo Burnett of a
saying of Bernard Berenson to the effect that the only thing the
Etruscans added to the art of the Greeks was “the originality of incompetence.” Fairfax Cone “would like to blot the word CREATIVITY out of our lives.” Ed Cox thinks that “there are no creative or
non-creative copywriters; only good ad-makers and bad.” Bear in
mind that Burnett, Cone, and Cox are among the most “creative”
men in the advertising business. How did we get along twenty years
ago, before “creativity” entered the lexicon of advertising? I am
ashamed to say that I sometimes use it myself, even as I write these
pages.
In this chapter I will expose to the reader what he would see in
my Magic Lantern on the day he came to work for Ogilvy, Benson
& Mather. The research on which it is based derives from five principal sources:
First, from the experience of mail-order advertisers. This elite
corps, represented by such masters as Harry Scherman of the Bookof-the-Month Club, Vic Schwab, and John Caples, knows more
about the realities of advertising than anybody else. They are in a
position to measure the results of every advertisement they write,
because their view is not obscured by those complex channels of distribution which make it impossible for most manufacturers to dissect
out the results of their advertising from all the other factors in their
marketing mix.
The mail-order advertiser has no retailers to shrink and expand
their inventories, to push his product or to hide it under the counter.
He must rely on his advertisements to do the entire selling job. Either the reader clips the coupon, or he doesn’t. A few days after his
advertisement appears, the mail-order writer knows whether it is
profitable or not.
For twenty-seven years I have kept my eyes riveted on what
mail-order advertisers do in their advertisements. And from this observation I have crystallized some general principles which can be
applied, I believe, to all kinds of advertising.
The second most valuable source of information as to what
makes some techniques succeed and others fail is the experience of
department stores. The day after they run an advertisement, they can
count the sales it has produced. That is why I am so attentive to the
advertising practices of Sears, Roebuck, who are the most knowing
of all retailers.
The third source of data on which my Magic Lantern depends is
the research done by Gallup, Starch, Clark-Hooper and Harold Rudolph on the factors which make people read advertisements and, in
23

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
the case of Dr. Gallup, the factors which make people remember
what they read. On the whole, their findings endorse the experience
of the mail-order fraternity.
More is known about consumer reactions to advertising in
newspapers and magazines than consumer reactions to television
commercials, because serious research into television—my fourth
source—was not started until ten years ago. However, Dr. Gallup
and others have already produced a body of knowledge about television advertising which is sufficient to emancipate us from total reliance on guesswork. (When it comes to radio commercials, there is
little or no research available from any source. Radio was made obsolete by television before anybody had learned to use it scientifically, but it has now recovered to the point where it may be described as the Cinderella of advertising media; it is time for the researchers to tackle it.)
My last source is less scientific. I am an inveterate brain-picker,
and the most rewarding brains I have picked are the brains of my
predecessors and my competitors. I have learned much from studying the successful campaigns of Raymond Rubicam, Jim Young, and
George Cecil.
Here, then, are my recipes for cooking up the kind of advertising campaigns which make the cash register ring—eleven commandments which you must obey if you work at my agency:
(1) What You Say Is More Important Than How You Say It.
Once upon a time I was riding on the top of a Fifth Avenue bus,
when I heard a mythical housewife say to another, “Molly, my dear,
I would have bought that new brand of toilet soap if only they hadn’t
set the body copy in ten point Garamond.”
Don’t you believe it. What really decides consumers to buy or
not to buy is the content of your advertising, not its form. Your most
important job is to decide what you are going to say about your
product, what benefit you are going to promise. Two hundred years
ago Dr. Johnson said, “Promise, large promise is the soul of an advertisement.” When he auctioned off the contents of the Anchor
Brewery he made the following promise: “We are not here to sell
boilers and vats, but the potentiality of growing rich beyond the
dreams of avarice.”
The selection of the right promise is so vitally important that
you should never rely on guesswork to decide it. At Ogilvy, Benson
& Mather, we use five research techniques to find out which is the
most powerful.
One technique is to distribute batches of the product to matched
samples of consumers, each batch bearing a different promise on the
package. Then we compare the percentages of consumers in each
sample who send us a repeat order.
Another technique is to show consumers cards on which we
have printed various promises, asking them to select the one which
would be most likely to make them buy the product. Here are the results of one such test:
FACE CREAM
Cleans Deep into Pores
Prevents Dryness
Is a Complete Beauty Treatment
Recommended by Skin Doctors
Makes Skin Look Younger
Prevents Make-up Caking
Contains Estrogenic Hormones
Pasteurized for Purity

*********************
******************
***********
***********
*********
******
*****
*****

Prevents Skin from Aging
Smoothes Out Wrinkles

***
***

From this voting came one of Helena Rubinstein’s most successful face creams. We christened it Deep Cleanser, thus building
the winning promise into the name of the product.
Another technique is to prepare a series of advertisements, each
built around a different promise. We then mail the advertisements to
matched samples and count the number of orders procured by each
promise.
Another technique is to run pairs of advertisements in the same
position in the same issue of a newspaper, with an offer of a sample
buried in the copy. We used this artful dodge to select the strongest
promise for Dove toilet bar. “Creams Your Skin While You Wash”
pulled 63 per cent more orders than the next best promise, and it has
been the fulcrum of every Dove advertisement that has ever run.
This marvelous product made a profit at the end of its first year, a
rare feat in the marketing world of today.
Finally, we have developed a technique for selecting basic
promises which is so valuable that my partners forbid me to reveal it.
They remind me of that selfish family of eighteenth-century obstetricians who made a fortune by delivering more live babies than any of
their competitors. They kept their secret for three generations; it was
not until an enterprising medical student climbed up and peeked
through the window of their surgery that the design of their forceps
was revealed to the world.
(2) Unless Your Campaign Is Built Around a Great Idea, It Will
Flop.
It isn’t every client who can recognize a great idea when he sees
it. I remember presenting a truly brilliant idea to a client who said,
“Mr. Ogilvy, you have here the mucus of a good idea.”
When I started writing advertisements, I was determined to
blaze new trails, to make every one of my campaigns the most successful in the history of the industry concerned. I have not always
failed.
(3) Give the Facts.
Very few advertisements contain enough factual information to
sell the product. There is a ludicrous tradition among copywriters
that consumers aren’t interested in facts. Nothing could be farther
from the truth. Study the copy in the Sears, Roebuck catalogue; it
sells a billion dollars’ worth of merchandise every year by giving
facts. In my Rolls-Royce advertisements I gave nothing but facts. No
adjectives, no “gracious living.”
The consumer isn’t a moron; she is your wife. You insult her intelligence if you assume that a mere slogan and a few vapid adjectives will persuade her to buy anything. She wants all the information you can give her.
Competing brands are becoming more and more alike. The men
who make them have access to the same scientific journals; they use
the same production techniques; and they are guided by the same research. When faced with the inconvenient fact that their brand is
about the same as several others, most copywriters conclude that
there is no point in telling the consumer what is common to all
brands; so they confine themselves to some trivial point of difference. I hope that they will continue to make this mistake, because it
enables us to pre-empt the truth for our clients.
When we advertise Shell, we give the consumer facts, many of
which other gasoline marketers could give, but don’t. When we advertise KLM Royal Dutch Airlines we tell travelers about the safety

24

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
precautions which all airlines take, but fail to mention in their advertisements.
When I was a door-to-door salesman I discovered that the more
information I gave about my product, the more I sold. Claude Hopkins made the same discovery about advertising, fifty years ago. But
most modern copywriters find it easier to write short, lazy advertisements. Collecting facts is hard work.
(4) You Cannot Bore People into Buying.
The average family is now exposed to more than 1500 advertisements a day. No wonder they have acquired a talent for skipping
the advertisements in newspapers and magazines, and going to the
bathroom during television commercials.
The average woman now reads only four of the advertisements
which appear in the average magazine. She glances at more, but one
glance is enough to tell her that the advertisement is too boring to
read.
Competition for the consumer’s attention is becoming more ferocious every year. She is being bombarded by a billion dollars’
worth of advertising a month. Thirty thousand brand names are
competing for a place in her memory. If you want your voice to be
heard above this ear-splitting barrage, your voice must be unique. It
is our business to make our clients’ voices heard above the crowd.
We make advertisements that people want to read. You can’t
save souls in an empty church. If you will embrace our rules, you
will be able to reach more readers per dollar.
I once asked Sir Hugh Rigby, Sergeant Surgeon to King George
V, “What makes a great surgeon?”
Sir Hugh replied, “There isn’t much to choose between surgeons in manual dexterity. What distinguishes the great surgeon is
that he knows more than other surgeons.” It is the same with advertising agents. The good ones know their craft.
(5) Be Weil-Mannered, But Don’t Clown.
People don’t buy from bad-mannered salesmen, and research
has shown that they don’t buy from bad-mannered advertisements. It
is easier to sell people with a friendly handshake than by hitting
them over the head with a hammer. You should try to charm the
consumer into buying your product.
This doesn’t mean that your advertisements should be cute or
comic. People don’t buy from clowns. When the housewife fills her
shopping basket, she is in a fairly serious frame of mind.
(6) Make Your Advertising Contemporary.
The young housewife of 1963 was born after President Roosevelt died. She is living in a new world. At the age of fifty-one I am
finding it increasingly difficult to tune in on the young married couples who are starting out in life; that is why most of the copywriters
at our agency are so young. They understand the psychology of
young consumers better than I do.
(7) Committees Can Criticize Advertisements, But They Cannot
Write Them.
A lot of advertisements and television commercials look like the
minutes of a committee meeting, and that is what they are. Advertising seems to sell most when it is written by a solitary individual. He
must study the product, the research, and the precedents. Then he
must shut the door of his office and write the advertisement. The
best advertisement I ever wrote went through seventeen drafts, and
built a business.

(8) If You Are Lucky Enough To Write a Good Advertisement,
Repeat It Until It Stops Pulling.
Scores of good advertisements have been discarded before they
lost their potency, largely because their sponsors got sick of seeing
them. Sterling Getchel’s famous advertisement for Plymouth (“Look
at All Three”) appeared only once, and was succeeded by a series of
inferior variations which were quickly forgotten. But the Sherwin
Cody School of English ran the same advertisement (“Do You Make
These Mistakes in English?”) for forty-two years, changing only the
type face and the color of Mr. Cody’s beard.
You aren’t advertising to a standing army; you are advertising
to a moving parade. Three million consumers get married every
year. The advertisement which sold a refrigerator to those who got
married last year will probably be just as successful with those who
get married next year. One million, seven hundred thousand consumers die every year, and 4,000,000 new ones are born. They enter
the market and they depart from it. An advertisement is like a radar
sweep, constantly hunting new prospects as they come into the market. Get a good radar, and keep It sweeping.
(9) Never Write an Advertisement Which You Wouldn’t Want
Your Own Family To Read.
You wouldn’t tell lies to your own wife. Don’t tell them to
mine. Do as you would be done by.
If you tell lies about a product, you will be found out—either by
the Government, which will prosecute you, or by the consumer, who
will punish you by not buying your product a second time.
Good products can be sold by honest advertising. If you don’t
think the product is good, you have no business to be advertising it.
If you tell lies, or weasel, you do your client a disservice, you increase your load of guilt, and you fan the flames of public resentment against the whole business of advertising.
(10) The Image and the Brand.
Every advertisement should be thought of as a contribution to
the complex symbol which is the brand image. If you take that long
view, a great many day-to-day problems solve themselves.
How do you decide what kind of image to build? There is no
short answer. Research cannot help you much here. You have actually got to use judgment. (I notice increasing reluctance on the part
of marketing executives to use judgment; they are coming to rely too
much on research, and they use it as a drunkard uses a lamp post, for
support rather than for illumination.)
Most manufacturers are reluctant to accept any limitation on the
image of their brand. They want it to be all things to all people. They
want their brand to be a male brand and a female brand. An uppercrust brand and a plebeian brand. They generally end up with a
brand which has no personality of any kind, a wishy-washy neuter.
No capon ever rules the roost.
Ninety-five per cent of all the campaigns now in circulation are
being created without any reference to such long-term considerations. They are being created ad hoc. Hence the lack of any consistent image from one year to another.
What a miracle it is when a manufacturer manages to sustain a
coherent style in his advertising over a period of years! Think of all
the forces that work to change it. The advertising managers come
and go. The copywriters come and go. Even the agencies come and
go.
It takes uncommon guts to stick to one style in the face of all
the pressures to “come up with something new” every six months. It
is tragically easy to be stampeded into change. But golden rewards

25

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
await the advertiser who has the brains to create a coherent image,
and the stability to stick with it over a long period. As examples, I
cite Campbell Soup, Ivory Soap, Esso, Betty Crocker, and Guinness
Stout (in England). The men who have been responsible for the advertising of these hardy perennials have understood that every advertisement, every radio program, every TV commercial is not a onetime shot, but a long-term investment in the total personality of their
brands. They have presented a consistent image to the world, and
grown rich in the process.
During the last few years the researchers have been able to tell
us what image old brands have acquired in the public mind. Some
manufacturers have been sobered to learn that their image has serious flaws, which have been hurting their sales. They then ask their
advertising agency to set about changing the image. This is one of
the most difficult operations we are ever called upon to perform, because the faulty image has been built up over a period of many
years. It is the result of many different factors—advertising, pricing,
the name of the product, its packaging, the kind of television shows
it has sponsored, the length of time it has been on the market, and so
on.
Most of the manufacturers who find it expedient to change the
image of their brand want it changed upward. Often it has acquired a
bargain-basement image, a useful asset in rimes of economic scarcity, but a grave embarrassment in boom days, when the majority of
consumers are on their way up the social ladder.
It isn’t easy to perform a face-lifting operation on an old bargain-basement brand. In many cases it would be easier to start again,
with a fresh new brand.
The greater the similarity between brands, the less part reason
plays in brand selection. There isn’t any significant difference between the various brands of whiskey, or cigarettes, or beer. They are
all about the same. And so are the cake mixes and the detergents,
and the margarines.
The manufacturer who dedicates his advertising to building the
most sharply defined personality for his brand will get the largest
share of the market at the highest profit. By the same token, the
manufacturers who will find themselves up the creek are those shortsighted opportunists who siphon off their advertising funds for promotions. Year after year I find myself warning my clients about
what will happen to their brands if they spend so much on promotions that there is no money left for advertising.
Price-off deals and other such hypodermics find favor with sales
managers, but their effect is ephemeral, and they can be habit-

forming. Says Bev Murphy, who invented Art Nielsen’s technique
for measuring consumer purchases and went on to become President
of Campbell Soup Company: “Sales are a function of product-value
and advertising. Promotions cannot produce more than a temporary
kink in the sales curve.” Jerry Lambert never used promotions for
Listerine; he knew that kinks in a sales curve make it impossible to
read out the results of advertising.
A steady diet of price-off promotions lowers the esteem in
which the consumer holds the product; can anything which is always
sold at a discount be desirable?
Plan your campaign for years ahead, on the assumption that
your clients intend to stay in business forever. Build sharply defined
personalities for their brands, and stick to those personalities, year
after year. It is the total personality of a brand rather than any trivial
product difference which decides its ultimate position in the market.
(11) Don’t Be a Copy-Cat.
Rudyard Kipling wrote a long poem about a self-made shipping
tycoon called Sir Anthony Gloster. On his death bed the old man reviews the course of his life for the benefit of his son, and refers contemptuously to his competitors:
They copied all they could follow, but they
couldn’t copy my mind,
And I left ‘em sweating and stealing, a year
and a half behind.
If you ever have the good fortune to create a great advertising
campaign, you will soon see another agency steal it. This is irritating, but don’t let it worry you; nobody has ever built a brand by imitating somebody else’s advertising.
Imitation may be the “sincerest form of plagiarism,” but it is
also the mark of an inferior person.
These, then, are the general principles I inculcate in our new recruits. When I recently invited a group of them who had completed
their first year with us to compare Ogilvy, Benson & Mather with
their previous agencies, I was agreeably surprised by the number
who fastened on the fact that we have a more clearly defined dogma.
Here is what one of them wrote:
Ogilvy, Benson & Mather has a consistent point of view, a corporate opinion of what constitutes good advertising. My previous
agency has none, and consequently is rudderless.

26

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man

VI
How to Write Potent Copy
I. Headlines
THE headline is the most important element in most advertisements. It is the telegram which decides the reader whether to read
the copy.
On the average, five times as many people read the headline as
read the body copy. When you have written your headline, you have
spent eighty cents out of your dollar.
If you haven’t done some selling in your headline, you have
wasted 80 per cent of your client’s money. The wickedest of all sins
is to run an advertisement without a headline. Such headless wonders are still to be found; I don’t envy the copywriter who submits
one to me.
A change of headline can make a difference of ten to one in
sales. I never write fewer than sixteen headlines for a single advertisement, and I observe certain guides in writing them:
(1) The headline is the “ticket on the meat.” Use it to flag down
the readers who are prospects for the kind of product you are advertising. If you are selling a remedy for bladder weakness, display the
words BLADDER WEAKNESS in your headline; they catch the eye
of everyone who suffers from this inconvenience. If you want mothers to read your advertisement, display MOTHERS in your headline.
And so on.
Conversely, do not say anything in your headline which is likely
to exclude any readers who might be prospects for your product.
Thus, if you are advertising a product which can be used equally
well by men and women, don’t slant your headline at women alone;
it would frighten men away.
(2) Every headline should appeal to the reader’s self-interest. It
should promise her a benefit, as in my headline for Helena Rubinstein’s Hormone Cream: HOW WOMEN OVER 35 CAN LOOK
YOUNGER.
(3) Always try to inject news into your headlines, because the
consumer is always on the lookout for new products, or new ways to
use an old product, or new improvements in an old product.
The two most powerful words you can use in a headline are
FREE and NEW. You can seldom use FREE, but you can almost
always use NEW—if you try hard enough.
(4) Other words and phrases which work wonders are HOW
TO, SUDDENLY, NOW, ANNOUNCING, INTRODUCING, IT’S
HERE, JUST ARRIVED, IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENT, IMPROVEMENT, AMAZING, SENSATIONAL, REMARKABLE,
REVOLUTIONARY, STARTLING, MIRACLE, MAGIC, OFFER,
QUICK, EASY, WANTED, CHALLENGE, ADVICE TO, THE
TRUTH ABOUT, COMPARE, BARGAIN, HURRY, LAST
CHANCE.

Don’t turn up your nose at these clichés. They may be shopworn, but they work. That is why you see them turn up so often in
the headlines of mail-order advertisers and others who can measure
the results of their advertisements.
Headlines can be strengthened by the inclusion of emotional
words, like DARLING, LOVE, FEAR, PROUD, FRIEND, and
BABY. One of the most provocative advertisements which has come
out of our agency showed a girl in a bathtub, talking to her lover on
the telephone. The headline: Darling, I’m having the most extraordinary experience . . . Г’m head over heels in DOVE.
(5) Five times as many people read the headline as read the
body copy, so it is important that these glancers should at least be
told what brand is being advertised. That is why you should always
include the brand name in your headlines.
(6) Include your selling promise in your headline. This requires
long headlines. When the New York University School of Retailing
ran headline tests with the cooperation of a big department store,
they found that headlines of ten words or longer, containing news
and information, consistently sold more merchandise than short
headlines.
Headlines containing six to twelve words pull more coupon returns than short headlines, and there is no significant “difference between the readership of twelve-word headlines and the readership of
three-word headlines. The best headline I ever wrote contained
eighteen words: At Sixty Miles an Hour the Loudest Noise in the
New Rolls-Royce comes from the electric clock. *
(7) People are more likely to read your body copy if your headline arouses their curiosity; so you should end your headline with a
lure to read on.
(8) Some copywriters write tricky headlines—puns, literary allusions, and other obscurities. This is a sin.
In the average newspaper your headline has to compete for attention with 350 others. Research has shown that readers travel so
fast through this jungle that they don’t stop to decipher the meaning
of obscure headlines. Your headline must telegraph what you want
to say, and it must telegraph it in plain language. Don’t play games
with the reader.
In 1960 the Times Literary Supplement attacked the whimsical
tradition in British advertising, calling it “self-indulgent—a kind of
middle-class private joke, apparently designed to amuse the advertiser and his client.” Amen.
*

When the chief engineer at the Rolls-Royce factory read this,
he shook his head sadly and said, “It is time we did something about
that damned clock.”
27

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
(9) Research shows that it is dangerous to use negatives in
headlines. If, for example, you write OUR SALT CONTAINS NO
ARSENIC, many readers will miss the negative and go away with
the impression that you wrote OUR SALT CONTAINS ARSENIC.
(10) Avoid blind headlines—the kind which mean nothing
unless you read the body copy underneath them; most people don’t.

II. Body copy
When you sit down to write your body copy, pretend that you
are talking to the woman on your right at a dinner party. She has
asked you, “I am thinking of buying a new car. Which would you
recommend?” Write your copy as if you were answering that question.
(1) Don’t beat about the bush—go straight to the point. Avoid
analogies of the “just as, so too” variety. Dr. Gallup has demonstrated that these two-stage arguments are generally misunderstood.
(2) Avoid superlatives, generalizations, and platitudes. Be specific and factual. Be enthusiastic, friendly, and memorable. Don’t be
a bore. Tell the truth, but make the truth fascinating.
How long should your copy be? It depends on the product. If
you are advertising chewing gum, there isn’t much to tell, so make
your copy short. If, on the other hand, you are advertising a product
which has a great many different qualities to recommend it, write
long copy: the more you tell, the more you sell.
There is a universal belief in lay circles that people won’t read
long copy. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Claude Hopkins
once wrote five pages of solid text for Schlitz beer. In a few months,
Schlitz moved up from fifth place to first. I once wrote a page of
solid text for Good Luck Margarine, with most gratifying results.
Research shows that readership falls off rapidly up to fifty
words of copy, but drops very little between fifty and 500 words. In
my first Rolls-Royce advertisement I used 719 words—piling one
fascinating fact on another. In the last paragraph I wrote, “People
who feel diffident about driving a Rolls-Royce can buy a Bentley.”
Judging from the number of motorists who picked up the word “diffident” and bandied it about, I concluded that the advertisement was
thoroughly read. In the next one I used 1400 words.
Every advertisement should be a complete sales pitch for your
product. It is unrealistic to assume that consumers will read a series
of advertisements for the same product. You should shoot the works
in every advertisement, on the assumption that it is the only chance
you will ever have to sell your product to the reader —now or never,
Says Dr. Charles Edwards of the graduate School of RetaHing
at New York University, “The more facts you tell, the more you sell.
An advertisement’s chance for success invariably increases as the
number of pertinent merchandise facts included in the advertisement
increases.”
In my first advertisement for Puerto Rico’s Operation Bootstrap, I used 961 words, and persuaded Beardsley Ruml to sign
them. Fourteen thousand readers clipped the coupon from this advertisement, and scores of them later established factories in Puerto
Rico. The greatest professional satisfaction I have yet had is to see
the prosperity in Puerto Rican communities which had lived on the
edge of starvation for four hundred years before I wrote my advertisement. If I had confined myself to a few vacuous generalities,
nothing would have happened.
We have even been able to get people to read long copy about
gasoline. One of our Shell advertisements contained 617 words, and
22 per cent of male readers read more than half of them.

Vic Schwab tells the story of Max Hart (of Hart, Schaffner &
Marx) and his advertising manager, George L. Dyer, arguing about
long copy. Dyer said, “I’ll bet you ten dollars I can write a newspaper page of solid type and you’d read every word of it.”
Hart scoffed at the idea. “I don’t have to write a line of it to
prove my point,” Dyer replied. “I’ll only tell you the headline:
THIS PAGE IS ALL ABOUT MAX HART.”
Advertisers who put coupons in their advertisements know that
short copy doesn’t sell. In split-run tests, long copy invariably outsells short copy.
Do I hear someone say that no copywriter can write long advertisements unless his media department gives him big spaces to work
with? This question should not arise, because the copywriter should
be consulted before planning the media schedule.
(3) You should always include testimonials in your copy. The
reader finds it easier to believe the endorsement of a fellow consumer than the puffery of an anonymous copywriter. Says Jim
Young, one of the best copywriters alive today, “Every type of advertiser has the same problem; namely to be believed. The mailorder man knows nothing so potent for this purpose as the testimonial, yet the general advertiser seldom uses it.”
Testimonials from celebrities get remarkably high readership,
and if they are honestly written they still do not seem to provoke incredulity. The better known the celebrity, the more readers you will
attract. We have featured Queen Elizabeth and Winston Churchill in
“Come to Britain” advertisements, and we were able to persuade
Mrs. Roosevelt to make television commercials for Good Luck Margarine. When we advertised charge accounts for Sears, Roebuck, we
reproduced the credit card of Ted Williams, “recently traded by Boston to Sears.”
Sometimes you can cast your entire copy in the form of a testimonial. My first advertisement for Austin cars took the form of a letter from an “anonymous diplomat” who was sending his son to
Groton with money he had saved driving an Austin—a well-aimed
combination of snobbery and economy. Alas, a perspicacious Time
editor guessed that I was the anonymous diplomat, and asked the
headmaster of Groton to comment. Dr. Crocker was so cross that I
decided to send my son to Hotchkiss.
(4) Another profitable gambit is to give the reader helpful advice, or service. It hooks about 75 per cent more readers than copy
which deals entirely with the product.
One of our Rinso advertisements told housewives how to remove stains. It was better read (Starch) and better remembered
(Gallup) than any detergent advertisement in history. Unfortunately,
however, it forgot to feature Rinso’s main selling promise —that
Rinso washes whiter; for this reason it should never have run. *
(5) I have never admired the belles lettres school of advertising,
which reached its pompous peak in Theodore F. Mac-Manus’ famous advertisement for Cadillac, “The Penalty of Leadership,” and
Ned Jordan’s classic, “Somewhere West of Laramie.” Forty years
ago the business community seems to have been impressed by these
pieces of purple prose, but I have always thought them absurd; they
did not give the reader a single fact. I share Claude Hopkins’ view
that “fine writing is a distinct disadvantage. So is unique literary
style. They take attention away from the subject.”

*

The photograph showed several different kinds of stain—
lipstick, coffee, shoe-polish, blood and so forth. The blood was my
own; I am the only copywriter who has ever bled for his client.
28

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
(6) Avoid bombast. Raymond Rubicam’s famous slogan for
Squibb, “The priceless ingredient of every product is the honor and
integrity of its maker,” reminds me of my father’s advice: when a
company boasts about its integrity, or a woman about her virtue,
avoid the former and cultivate the latter.
(7) Unless you have some special reason to be solemn and pretentious, write your copy in the colloquial language which your customers use in everyday conversation. I have never acquired a sufficiently good ear for vernacular American to write it, but I admire
copywriters who can pull it off, as in this unpublished pearl from a
dairy farmer:
Carnation Milk is the best in the land,
Here I sit with a can in my hand.
No tits to pull, no hay to pitch,
Just punch a hole in the son-of-a-bitch.
It is a mistake to use highfalutin language when you advertise to
uneducated people. I once used the word OBSOLETE in a headline,
only to discover that 43 per cent of housewives had no idea what it
meant. In another headline, I used the word INEFFABLE, only to
discover that I didn’t know what it meant myself.
However, many copywriters of my vintage err on the side of
underestimating the educational level of the population. Philip
Hauser, head of the Sociology Department at the University of Chicago, draws attention to the changes which are taking place:
The increasing exposure of the population to formal schooling .
. . can be expected to affect important changes in ... the style of advertising. . . . Messages aimed at the “average” American on the assumption that he has had less than a grade school education are
likely to find themselves with a declining or disappearing clientele. *

Meanwhile, all copywriters should read Dr. Rudolph Flesch’s
Art of Plain Talk. It will persuade them to use short words, short
sentences, short paragraphs, and highly personal copy.
Aldous Huxley, who once tried his hand at writing advertisements, concluded that “any trace of literariness in an advertisement
is fatal to its success. Advertisement writers may not be lyrical, or
obscure, or in any way esoteric. They must be universally intelligible. A good advertisement has this in common with drama and oratory, that it must be immediately comprehensible and directly moving.” *
(8) Resist the temptation to write the kind of copy which wins
awards. I am always gratified when I win an award, but most of the
campaigns which produce results never win award, because they
don’t draw attention to themselves.
The juries that bestow awards are never given enough information about the results of the advertisements they are called upon to
judge. In the absence of such information, they rely on their opinions, which are always warped toward the highbrow.
(9) Good copywriters have always resisted the temptation to entertain. Their achievement lies in the number of new products they
get off to a flying start. In a class by himself stands Claude Hopkins,
who is to advertising what Escoffier is to cooking. By today’s standards, Hopkins was an unscrupulous barbarian, but technically he
was the supreme master. Next I would place Raymond Rubicam,
George Cecil, and James Webb Young, all of whom lacked Hopkins’ ruthless salesmanship, but made up for it by their honesty, by
the broader range of their work, and by their ability to write civilized
copy when the occasion required it. Next I would place John Caples,
the mail-order specialist from whom I have learned much.
These giants wrote their advertisements for newspapers and
magazines. It is still too early to identify the best writers for television.

*

*

Scientific American (October 1962).

Essays Old And New (Harper & Brothers, 1927). Charles
Lamb and Byron also wrote advertisements. So did Bernard Shaw,
Hemingway, Marquand, Sherwood Anderson, and Faulkner—none
of them with any degree of success.
29

VII
How to Illustrate Advertisements
and Posters
Advertisements
MOST copywriters think in terms of words, and devote little
time to planning their illustrations. Yet the illustration often occupies
more space than the copy, and it should work just as hard to sell the
product. It should telegraph the same promise that you make in your
headline.
Doyle, Dane & Bernbach have a unique genius for illustrating
advertisements; the photographs they have used for Volkswagen are
in a class by themselves.
The subject of your illustration is more important than its technique. As in all areas of advertising, substance is more important
than form. If you have a remarkable idea for a photograph, it does
not require a genius to click the shutter. If you haven’t got a remarkable idea, not even Irving Penn can save you.
Dr. Gallup has discovered that the kind of photographs which
win awards from camera clubs—sensitive, subtle, and beautifully
composed—don’t work in advertisements. What do work are photographs which arouse the reader’s curiosity. He glances at the photograph and says to himself, “What goes on here?” Then he reads your
copy to find out. This is the trap to set.
Harold Rudolph called this magic element “story appeal,” and
demonstrated that the more of it you inject into your photographs,
the more people will look at your advertisements. This discovery has
had a profound effect on the campaigns produced by my agency.
When we were asked to preside over Hathaway’s debut as a national advertiser, I was determined to give them a campaign which
would be better than Young & Rubicam’s historic campaign for Arrow shirts. But Hathaway could spend only $30,000 against Arrow’s
$2,000,000. A miracle was required.
Knowing from Rudolph that a strong dose of “story appeal”
would make readers stop and take notice, I concocted eighteen different ways to inject this magic ingredient. The eighteenth was the
eye patch. At first we rejected it in favor of a more obvious idea, but
on the way to the studio I ducked into a drugstore and bought an eye
patch for $1.50. Exactly why it turned out to be so successful, I shall
never know. It put Hathaway on the map after 116 years of relative
obscurity. Seldom, if ever, has a national brand been created so fast,
or at such low cost. Articles were written about it in newspapers and
magazines all over the world. Scores of other manufacturers stole it
for their own advertising—I have seen five copies from Denmark
alone. What struck me as a moderately good idea for a wet Tuesday
morning made me famous. I could have wished for fame to come
from some more serious achievement.
As the campaign developed, I showed the model in a series of
situations in which I would have liked to find myself: conducting the

New York Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall, playing the oboe, copying
a Goya at the Metropolitan Museum, driving a tractor, fencing, sailing, buying a Renoir, and so forth. After eight years of this, my
friend Ellerton Jette sold the Hathaway company to a Boston financier, who resold it six months later at a profit of several million dollars. My total profit on the account had been $6,000. If I were a financier instead of an advertising agent, how rich I would be, and how
bored.
Another example of “story appeal” was a photograph which
Elliott Erwitt took for our Puerto Rico tourism campaign. Instead of
photographing Pablo Casals playing his cello, Erwitt photographed
an empty room, with the great man’s cello leaning against a chair.
Why was the room empty? Where was Casals? Those were the questions raised in the reader’s mind, and he looked for the answer in our
copy. After reading it, he made reservations for the Casals Festival
in San Juan. During the first six years of this campaign, tourist expenditures in Puerto Rico went up from $19,000,000 to $53,000,000
a year.
If you will take the trouble to get great photographs for your
advertisements, you will not only sell more, you will also bask in the
glow of public esteem. I was comforted when Professor J. K.
Galbraith, that redoubtable critic of advertising, wrote to me, “For
years I have been interested in photography, and for quite a long
time I have picked out yours as really superb examples of both selection and reproduction.”
Over and over again research has shown that photographs sell
more than drawings. They attract more readers. They deliver more
appetite appeal. They are better remembered. They pull more coupons. And they sell more merchandise. Photographs represent reality, whereas drawings represent fantasy, which is less believable.
When we took over the “Come to Britain” advertising we substituted photographs for the drawings which the previous agency had
been using. Readership tripled, and in the subsequent ten years U.S.
tourist expenditures in Britain have tripled.
It grieves me to tell you not to use drawings, because I would
dearly like to help artists get commissions to illustrate advertisements. But the advertisements would not sell, the clients would go
broke, and then there would be no patrons left to support the artists.
If you use photographs, your clients will prosper sufficiently to buy
paintings and present them to public galleries.
Some manufacturers illustrate their advertisements with abstract
paintings. I would only do this if I wished to conceal from the reader
what I was advertising. It is imperative that your illustration telegraph to the reader what it is that you are offering for sale. Abstract

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
art does not telegraph its message fast enough for use in advertisements.
The only advertiser who ever made a success with nonrepresentational illustrations was the late Walter Paepcke. The eccentricity of his campaign for the Container Corporation seems to have set
that company apart from its competitors; but it takes more than one
swallow to make a summer. Reader, beware of eccentricity when
you advertise to people who are not eccentric.
Before-and-after photographs seem to fascinate readers, and to
make their point better than any words. So does a challenge to the
reader to tell the difference between two similar photographs, as in
“Which Twin Has the Toni?”
When in doubt as to which of two illustrations to use, test their
relative pulling power by split-running them in a newspaper. We
used this technique to settle a dispute over whether KLM advertisements should be illustrated with photographs of aircraft or photographs of destinations. The latter pulled twice as many coupons as
the former. That is why all KLM advertisements are now illustrated
with photographs of destinations.
When I worked for Dr. Gallup, I was able to demonstrate that
moviegoers are more interested in actors of their own sex than in actors of the opposite sex. True, there are a few exceptions to this rule:
the female sex-kittens find great favor with male moviegoers and the
lesbian stars do not appeal to men. But, in general, people take more
interest in movie stars with whom they can identify. In the same
way, the cast of characters in most people’s dreams contains more
people of their own sex than of the opposite sex. Dr. Calvin Hall reports that “the male-female character ratio in male dreams is 1.7 to i.
This . . . appears also in Hopi dreams. ... It may prove to be a universal phenomenon.” *
I have observed the same force at work in consumer reactions to
advertisements. When you use a photograph of a woman, men ignore your advertisement. When you use a photograph of a man, you
exclude women from your audience.
If you want to attract women readers, your best bet is to use a
photograph of a baby. Research has shown that they stop almost
twice as many women as photographs of families. When you were a
baby you were the cynosure of every eye, but by the time you became a mere member of the family, you attracted no special attention.
Here you run into a peculiar difficulty. Most manufacturers object to illustrating babies in their advertisements, because babies
consume such small tonnage; they want you to show the whole
ruddy family.
One of the most agreeable chores in advertising is selecting
pretty girls to appear in advertisements and television commercials. I
used to arrogate this function to myself, but gave it up after comparing my personal taste in girls with the taste of female consumers.
Men don’t like the same kind of girls that girls like.
Advertisements are twice as memorable, on the average, when
they are illustrated in color.
Avoid historical subjects. They may be useful for advertising
whiskey, but for nothing else.
*

Dr. Hall’s analysis of 3,874 dreams led him to some other remarkable conclusions, including these: “The faucet was invented by
a man who wanted a better penis. Money was invented by someone
who wanted to accumulate a bigger pile of feces. Rockets to the
moon were invented by a group of dissatisfied oedipal animals.
Houses were invented by wombseekers, and whiskey by breastlings.”

Don’t show enlarged close-ups of the human face; they seem to
repel readers.
Keep your illustrations as simple as possible, with the focus of
interest on one person. Crowd scenes don’t pull.
Avoid stereotyped situations like grinning housewives pointing
fatuously into open refrigerators.
When you get into a jam, you may find this advice helpful:
When the client moans and sighs,
Make his logo twice the size.
If he still should prove refractory,
Show a picture of the factory.
Only in the gravest cases
Should you show the clients’ faces.
“Making the logo twice the size” is often a good thing to do,
because most advertisements are deficient in brand identification.
“Showing the clients’ faces” is also a better stratagem than it
may sound, because the public is more interested in personalities
than in corporations. Some clients, like Helena Rubinstein and
Commander Whitehead, can be projected as human symbols of their
own products.
But it is never wise to “show a picture of the factory”—unless
the factory is for sale.
Most of the art schools which train unsuspecting students for
careers in advertising still subscribe to the mystique of the Bauhaus.
They hold that the success of an advertisement depends on such
things as “balance,” “movement,” and “design.” But can they prove
it?
My research suggests that these aesthetic intangibles do not increase sales, and I cannot conceal my hostility to the old school of
art directors who take such preachments seriously. Imagine my horror when their college of cardinals, the august Art Directors Club,
gave Henry Luce, Frank Stanton, Henry Ford and myself special
awards for “encouraging art directors to work in the best possible
climate.” Did they not know that I wage war on art-directoritis, the
disease which reduces advertising campaigns to impotence?
I no longer enter my agency’s layouts in the contests organized
by the art directors’ societies, for fear that one of them might be disgraced by an award. Their gods are not my gods. I have my own
dogma, and it springs from observing the behavior of human beings,
as recorded by Dr. Gallup, Dr. Starch, and the mail-order experts.
Always design your layout for the publication in which it will
appear, and never approve it until you have seen how it looks when
pasted into that publication. The almost universal practice of appraising layouts in vacuo, mounted on gray cardboard and covered
with cellophane, is dangerously misleading. A layout must relate to
the graphic climate of the newspaper or magazine which is to carry
it.
A young and inexperienced client recently said to me, “I knew
which of your layouts was the best as soon as I saw them tacked up
on my bulletin board.” That is not the environment in which readers
see advertisements.
There is no need for advertisements to look like advertisements.
If you make them look like editorial pages, you will attract about 50
per cent more readers. You might think that the public would resent
this trick, but there is no evidence to suggest that they do.
Our Zippo advertisements are laid out with the same kind of
straightforward simplicity that the Life editors use. No gadgetry. No
clutter. No arty use of type for purposes of decoration. No hand lettering. No trade marks. No symbols. (Trade marks and symbols were
valuable in olden days, because they made it possible for illiterates

31

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
to identify your brand. But illiteracy has disappeared in the United
States, and you can now rely on printed names for purposes of identification.)
Magazine editors have discovered that people read the explanatory captions under photographs more than they read the text of articles; and the same thing is true of advertisements. When we analyzed Starch data on advertisements in Life, we found that on the average twice as many people read the captions as read the body copy.
Thus captions offer you twice the audience you get for body copy. It
follows that you should never use a photograph without putting a
caption under it, and each caption should be a miniature advertisement, complete with brand name and promise.
If you can keep your body copy down to 170 words, you should
set it in the form of a caption under your photograph, as we have
done in our magazine advertisements for Tetley Tea.
If you need very long copy, there are several devices which are
known to increase its readership:
(1) A display subhead of two or three lines, between your headline and your body copy, will heighten the reader’s appetite for the
feast to come.
(2) If you start your body copy with a large initial letter, you
will increase readership by an average of 13 per cent.
(3) Keep your opening paragraph down to a maximum of
eleven words. A long first paragraph frightens readers away. All
your paragraphs should be as short as possible; long paragraphs are
fatiguing.
(4) After two or three inches of copy, insert your first crosshead, and thereafter pepper cross-heads throughout. They keep the
reader marching forward. Make some of them interrogative, to excite
curiosity in the next run of copy. An ingenious sequence of boldly
displayed cross-heads can deliver the substance of your entire pitch
to glancers who are too lazy to wade through the text.
(5) Set your copy in columns not more than forty characters
wide. Most people acquire their reading habits from newspapers,
which use columns of about twenty-six characters. The wider the
measure, the fewer the readers.
(6) Type smaller than p-point is difficult for most people to
read. This book is set in 11 point.
(7) Serif type like this is easier to read than sans serif type
like this. The Bauhaus brigade is not aware of this fact.
(8) When I was a boy it was fashionable to make copywriters
square up every paragraph. Since then it has been discovered that
“widows” increase readership, except at the bottom of a column,
where they make it too easy for the reader to quit.
(9) Break up the monotony of long copy by setting key paragraphs in boldface or italic.
(10) Insert illustrations from time to time.
(11) Help the reader into your paragraphs with arrowheads, bullets, asterisks, and marginal marks.
(12) If you have a lot of unrelated facts to recite, don’t try to relate them with cumbersome connectives; simply number them, as I
am doing here.
(13) Never set your copy in reverse (white type on a black background), and never set it over a gray or colored tint. The old school
of art directors believed that these devices forced people to read the
copy; we now know that they make reading physically impossible.
(14) If you use leading between paragraphs, you increase readership by an average of 12 per cent.
The more typographical changes you make in your headline, the
fewer people will read it. At our agency we run straight through our

headlines in the same type face, in the same size, and in the same
weight.
Set your headline, and indeed your whole advertisement, in
lower case. CAPITAL LETTERS ARE MUCH HARDER то
READ, PROBABLY BECAUSE WE LEARN то READ in lower
case. People read all their books, newspapers, and magazines in
lower case.
Never deface your illustration by printing your headline over it.
Old-fashioned art directors love doing this, but it reduces the attention value of the advertisement by an average of 19 per cent. Newspaper editors never do it. In general, imitate the editors; they form
the reading habits of your customers.
When your advertisement is to contain a coupon, and you want
the maximum returns, put it at the top, bang in the middle. This position pulls 80 per cent more coupons than the traditional outsidebottom of the page. (Not one advertising man in a hundred knows
this.)
H. L. Mencken once said that nobody ever went broke underestimating the taste of the American public. That is not true. I have
come to believe that it pays to make all your layouts project a feeling
of good taste, provided that you do it unobtrusively. An ugly layout
suggests an ugly product. There are very few products which do not
benefit from being given a First-Class ticket through life. In a socially mobile society, people do not like to be seen consuming products which their friends regard as Second-Class.

Posters
Not long ago I received a touching tribute to one of my posters,
in the form of a letter from the pastor of an Ethiopian Baptist Church
in California:
Dear Mr. Ogilvy:
I am the head of a small church group which is spreading the
Lord’s word on the highways of California. We use a lot of poster
advertising and run into many problems due to high art costs. I saw
the poster for Schweppes, the one with the bearded man who has his
arms stretched out. What I would like to know is, can you send that
photograph along to me when you are done with it? We would have
JESUS SAVES printed on it, and put it up on the highways of California, spreading the Lord’s word.
If my client’s face could become identified with the Son of
God, we would never have to spend another penny on advertising,
and the whole Baptist world would be converted to Schweppes. My
imagination boggled. Only fear of losing my commissions persuaded
me to tell the pastor that Commander Whitehead was not worthy of
this holy role.
I have never liked posters. The passing motorist does not have
time to read more than six words on a poster, and my early experiences as a door-to-door salesman convinced me that it is impossible
to sell anything with only six words. In a newspaper or magazine

32

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
advertisement, I can use hundreds of words. Posters are for sloganeers.
As a private person, I have a passion for landscape, and I have
never seen one which was improved by a billboard. Where every
prospect pleases, man is at his vilest when he erects a billboard.
When I retire from Madison Avenue, I am going to start a secret society of masked vigilantes who will travel about the world on silent
motor bicycles, chopping down posters at the dark of the moon. How
many juries will convict us when we are caught in these acts of beneficent citizenship?
The people who own the billboards are unscrupulous lobbyists.
They have done their foul best to torpedo the legislation which prohibits posters on the new American turnpikes. They plead that the
poster industry employs thousands of workers. So do brothels.
However, posters are still with us, and sooner or later you may
be called upon to design one. So here goes.
Try to make your poster a tour de force—what Savignac calls a
“visual scandal.” If you overdo the scandal, you will stop the traffic
and cause fatal accidents.
In Europe it has long been the fashion to criticize American
posters for being so low-brow. Nobody could pretend that American
posters can hold their own, esthetically, with the posters of Cassandre, Leupin, Savignac and McKnight Kauffer. But, alas, there is rea-

son to believe that the corny American style makes its point faster,
and is better remembered, than the more distinguished designs of
European artists.
During the second German War, the Canadian Government engaged my old boss, Dr. George Gallup, to measure the relative efficiency of several recruiting posters. Dr. Gallup found that the posters
which worked best with the most people were those which used realistic artwork or photographs. Abstract or symbolic designs did not
communicate their message fast enough.
Your poster should deliver the selling promise of your product,
not only in words, but also pictorially. Only a handful of advertising
men have the genius to do this, and I am not one of them.
If your poster is aimed at passing motorists—you rascal, you—
it must do its work in five seconds. Research has shown that it will
communicate faster if you use strong, pure colors; don’t paint with a
dirty palette. Never use more than three elements in your design, and
silhouette them against a white background.
Above all, use the largest possible type (sans-serif), and make
your brand-name visible at a glance. It seldom is.
If you will follow these simple directions, you will produce
posters which do their job. But I must warn you that you will not endear yourself to connoisseurs of contemporary art. Indeed, you may
find yourself pilloried as a yahoo.

VIII
How to Make Good Television
Commercials

“THE FEW SECONDS of an advertising commercial,” says
Stanhope Shelton, “will fit into a pillbox two and one half inches in
diameter. This tiny pillbox-full represents several weeks of concentrated effort on the part of thirty people. It can make the difference
between profit and loss.”
I have found that it is easier to double the selling power of a
commercial than to double the audience of a program. This may
come as news to the Hollywood hidalgos who produce the programs
and look down their noses at us obscure copywriters who write the
commercials.
The purpose of a commercial is not to entertain the viewer, but
to sell him. Horace Schwerin reports that there is no correlation between people liking commercials and being sold by. But this does
not mean that your commercials should be deliberately badmannered. On the contrary, there is reason to believe that it pays to
make them human and friendly, if you can do so without being unctuous.
In the early days of television, I made the mistake of relying on
words to do the selling; I had been accustomed to radio, where there
are no pictures. I now know that in television you must make your

pictures tell the story; what you show is more important than what
you say. Words and pictures must march together, reinforcing each
other. The only function of the words is to explain what the pictures
are showing.
Dr. Gallup reports that if you say something which you don’t
also illustrate, the viewer immediately forgets it. I conclude that if
you don’t show it, there is no point in saying it. Try running your
commercial with the sound turned off; if it doesn’t sell without
sound, it is useless.
Most commercials befuddle the viewer by drowning him in logorrhea, a torrent of words. I advise you to restrict yourself to ninety
words a minute.
It is true that you can deliver somewhat more selling points in a
television commercial than in a printed advertisement, but the most
effective commercials are built around only one or two points, simply stated. A hodgepodge of many points leaves the viewer unmoved. That is why commercials should never be created in committee. Compromise has no place in advertising. Whatever you do, go
the whole hog.

33

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
When you advertise in magazines and newspapers, you must
start by attracting the reader’s attention. But in television the viewer
is already attending; your problem is not to frighten her away. It is
fatal to warn her that she is about to hear “a friendly word from our
sponsor.” Her bladder will react to this stimulus as Pavlov’s dog reacted to the sound of a bell: she will leave the room.
The purpose of most commercials is to deliver your selling
promise in a way the viewer will remember next time she goes shopping. I therefore advise you to repeat your promise at least twice in
every commercial, to illustrate it pictorially, and to print it on the
screen as a “title” or “super.”
The average consumer, poor dear, is now subjected to 10,000
commercials a year. Make sure that she knows the name of the product being advertised in your commercial. Repeat it, ad nauseam,
throughout. * Show it in at least one title. And show her the package
which you want her to recognize in the store.
Make your product the hero of the commercial, as it is the hero
of our famous commercial for Maxwell House Coffee—just a coffeepot and a cup of coffee—“good to the last drop.” (I did not invent
this slogan; Theodore Roosevelt did.)
In television advertising you have exactly fifty-eight seconds to
make your sale, and your client is paying $500 a second. Don’t mess
about with irrelevant lead-ins. Start selling in your first frame, and
never stop selling until the last.
For products which lend themselves to selling by demonstration—e.g., cooking ingredients, make-up, and sinus remedies—
television is the most powerful advertising medium ever invented.
Success in using it depends more than anything else on your ingenuity in devising believable demonstrations. The publicity which has
attended some of the Federal Trade Commission’s indictments has
made the American public suspicious of trickery.
Dr. Gallup is a fountain of useful information on how people
react to different kinds of commercials. He tells us that commercials
which start by setting up a problem, then wheel up your product to
solve the problem, then prove the solution by demonstration, sell
four times as many people as commercials which merely preach
about the product.
Dr. Gallup also reports that commercials with a strong element
of news are particularly effective. So you should squeeze every drop
of news value out of the material available for your commercials.

But sometimes, alas, there isn’t any news. Your product may
have been on the market for generations, and there may have been
no significant improvement in its formula. Some products cannot be
presented as the solution to any problem. Some do not lend themselves to demonstration. What do you do when these surefire gambits are denied to you? Do you give up? Not necessarily. There is
another gambit available which can move mountains: emotion and
mood. It is a difficult gambit to use without inducing derision in the
viewer, but it has been used with consummate success in Europe, notably by Mather & Crowther in their commercials for Player’s Cigarettes.
The average consumer now sees 900 commercials a month, and
most of them slide off her memory like water off a duck’s back. For
this reason you should give your commercials a touch of singularity,
a burr that will make them stick in the viewer’s mind. But be very
careful how you do this; the viewer is apt to remember your burr but
forget your selling promise.
At two o’clock one morning I awoke from a troubled sleep with
such a burr in my mind, and wrote it down: open the Pep-peridge
Farm commercials by having Titus Moody drive a baker’s wagon
with a team of horses along a country lane. It worked.
Don’t sing your selling message. Selling is a serious business.
How would you react if you went into a Sears store to buy a frying
pan and the salesman started singing jingles at you?
Candor compels me to admit that I have no conclusive research
to support my view that jingles are less persuasive than the spoken
word. It is based on the difficulty I always experience in hearing the
words in jingles, and on my experience as a door-to-door salesman; I
never sang to my prospects. The advertisers who believe in the selling power of jingles have never had to sell anything.
This prejudice of mine is not shared by all my partners. When I
go on vacation they occasionally have time to foist a jingle on one of
our clients, and at least one of their jingles made the welkin ring.
This exception proves my rule. *
The screens in movie theaters are forty feet wide, which is big
enough for crowd scenes and long-distance shots. But the television
screen is less than two feet wide, which is not big enough for Ben
Hur. I advise you to use nothing but extreme close-ups in television
commercials.
Avoid hackneyed situations—delighted drinkers, ecstatic eaters,
families exhibiting togetherness, and all the other clichés of poor old
Madison Avenue. They do not increase the consumer’s interest in
buying your product.

*

*

One of my sisters has suggested that the name of our agency
should be changed to Ad Nauseam, Inc.

Since writing this paragraph, I have been shown research on
two commercials for a famous brand of margarine. The commercials
were identical, except that in one the words were spoken, while in
the other they were sung. The spoken version switched three times
as many consumers as the sung version.
34

IX
How to Make Good Campaigns
for Food Products,
Tourist Destinations and
Proprietary Medicines

MOST of the commandments in this book, and the research
from which they derive, have to do with advertising in general. But
every category of product presents its own special problems. When
you advertise detergents, for example, you have to decide whether to
promise that your product will wash whiter, or cleaner, or brighter.
When you advertise whiskey, you have to decide how much prominence to give to the bottle. When you advertise deodorants, you have
to decide how much emphasis to give to deodorizing your customer,
and how much to keeping her dry.

Food products
The advertising of food products presents many special problems. How, for example, can you make food look appetizing in
black-and-white on a television screen? Can any combination of
words persuade the reader of your advertisement that a food product
tastes good? How important are promises of nutrition? Should you
show people eating the product?
I have tried to answer such questions by research. What I have
so far learned can be boiled down to twenty-two commandments:
Print
1i) Build your advertisement around appetite appeal.
(2) The larger your food illustration, the more appetite appeal.
(3) Don’t show people in food advertisements. They take up
space that is better devoted to the food itself.
(4) Use color. Food looks more appetizing in color than in
black-and-white.
(5) Use photographs—they have more appetite appeal than art
work.
(6) One photograph is better than two or more. If you have to
use several photographs, make one of them dominant.
(7) Give a recipe whenever you can. The housewife is always
on the lookout for new ways to please her family.
(8) Don’t bury your recipe in your body copy. Isolate it, loud
and clear.
(9) Illustrate your recipe in your main photograph.
(10) Don’t print your recipe over a screen; it will be read by far
more women if you print it on clean white paper.
(11) Get news into your advertisements whenever you can —
news about a new product, an improvement in an old product, or a
new use for an old product.

(12) Make your headline specific, rather than general.
(13) Include your brand name in your headline.
(14) Locate your headline and copy below your illustration.
(15) Display your package prominently, but don’t allow it to
dominate your appetite photograph.
(16) Be serious. Don’t use humor or fantasy. Don’t be clever in
your headline. Feeding her family is a serious business for most
housewives.
Television
(17) Show how to prepare your product.
(18) Use the problem-solution gambit whenever you can do so
without being farfetched.
(19) Whenever possible, give news—and play it loud and clear.
(20) Show your product early in the commercial.
(21) Don’t use sound for its own sake. Only use sound effects
which are relevant to your product—the perking of a coffeepot, the
sizzle of a steak, the crunch of cornflakes.
(22) Commercials are for selling. Don’t allow entertainment to
dominate.

Tourist destinations
Experience as the advertising agent for the British Travel &
Holidays Association, for Puerto Rico, and for the United States
Travel Service has led me to certain conclusions as to what makes
for good tourism advertising. They may be summarized as follows:
1i) Destination advertising is bound to affect the image of the
country concerned. It is politically important that it should affect it
favorably. If you run crummy advertisements for your country, you
will make people think that it is a crummy country.
(2) Tourists do not travel thousands of miles to see things
which they can see next door. For example, people who live in Switzerland cannot be persuaded to travel five thousand miles to see the
mountains in Colorado. Advertise what is unique in your country.
(3) Your advertisements should establish in the reader’s mind
an image which she will never forget. The period of gestation between exposure to an advertisement and the purchase of a ticket is
likely to be very long.
(4) Your advertisements appear in media which are read by
people who can afford to travel long distances. These people are

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
well educated. Do not insult their intelligence; write in adult language—not in the clichés of conventional travel advertising.
(5) The biggest barrier to international travel is cost. Your advertisements should help the reader to rationalize the cost of his
journey by selling its cultural and status overtones.
(6) Patterns of travel are peculiarly subject to fashion. Your advertisements should put your country on the map as the place where
“everybody” is going. Bandwagons work like magic in tourism.
(7) People dream about far-away places. Your advertisements
should convert their dreams into action—transforming potential energy into kinetic energy. This can best be done by offering the reader
specific how-to-do-it information. A combination of mouth-watering
photographs and specific information has brought the best results for
British, American and Puerto Rican tourism.’
(8) Beware of esoteric subjects. They may interest the nationals
of the country sponsoring the campaign, but the foreign tourist—the
customer—is out to collect clichés.
My “Come To Britain” advertisements have been conspicuously
successful, but they have been subjected to a drumfire of criticism in
the British press. The charge against them is that they damage British prestige by projecting an antique image—too many thatched cottages, too much pomp and circumstance. I am rebuked for creating
the impression that England is a bucolic little kingdom living on the
glories of an ancient past. Why don’t I show England “as she really
is,” the vital, industrialized, welfare state which has given the world
penicillin, jet engines, Henry Moore and atomic-power stations?
While this kind of thing might well be politically valuable, the
only purpose of our campaign is to attract tourists, and no American
is going to cross the briny ocean to look at a power station. He
would rather see Westminster Abbey; so would I.
When deciding which countries to visit when he goes abroad,
the American tourist is influenced by his attitude to the local inhabitants. My surveys show that he expects the British to be polite, cultured, honest, straightforward, clean and moral. But he also expects
them to be aloof, pompous and doleful. So, in our advertising, we do
our best to correct the disagreeable aspects of this stereotype by writing about the friendliness of English people.

I have been surprised to find that American tourists do not
“travel on their stomachs.” As the graduate of a French kitchen, I
find it difficult to believe that so many American tourists actually
like English cooking better than French cooking, but such is the
case. They cannot read French menus, and they detest rich sauces.
Nor is England at any disadvantage vis-a-vis the French when it
comes to quenching the thirst of the American tourist. He may not
appreciate English beer, but he would rather drink Scotch whisky
than claret—a preference which is shared by an increasing number
of Frenchmen. We live in terrible times.
I once found myself conspiring with a British cabinet minister
as to how we might persuade Her Majesty’s Treasury to cough up
more money for the British travel advertising in America. Said he,
“Why does any American in his senses spend his vacation in the
cold damp of an English summer when he could equally well bask
under Italian skies? I can only suppose that your advertising is the
answer.”

Proprietary medicines
Advertising drugs is a special art. Here, stated with the dogmatism of brevity, are the principles I recommend to those who practice
this art: *
(1) A good patent-medicine advertisement seizes upon “the
compelling difference” between your brand and its competitors.
(2) A good patent-medicine advertisement contains news. The
news may be a new product, a new aspect of an existing product, a
new diagnosis, or a new name for a familiar complaint—like halitosis.
(3) A good patent-medicine advertisement has a feeling of seriousness. Physical discomfort is no joking matter to the’ sufferer. He
welcomes recognition of the reality of his complaint.
(4) A good patent-medicine advertisement conveys a feeling of
authority. There is a doctor-patient relationship inherent in medicine
copy, not merely a seller-buyer relationship.
(5) The advertisement should not merely extol the merits of
your product; it should also explain the disease. The sufferer should
feel that he has learned something about his condition.
(6) Do not strain credulity. A person in pain wants to believe
that you can help him. His will to believe is an active ingredient in
the efficacy of the product.

*

I have to thank Louis Redmond for help in arriving at these
principles.
36

X
How to Rise to the Top of the Tree
(Advice to the Young )

ONE of my Irish ancestors entered the service of John Company and succeeded in “shaking the Pagoda-tree.” In other words, he
made a fortune. Now I am an ancestor myself, and I spend my waking hours shaking the Pagoda-tree on Madison Avenue. How is it
done?
After watching the careermanship of my own employees for
fourteen years, I have identified a pattern of behavior which leads
rapidly to the top.
First, you must be ambitious, but you must not be so nakedly
aggressive that your fellow workers rise up and destroy you. Tout
soldat pone dans sa giberne le baton de marechal. Yes, but don’t let
it stick out.
If you go straight into an advertising agency after leaving the
Harvard Business School, conceal your arrogance and keep up your
studies. After a year of tedious training, you will probably be made
an assistant account executive—a sort of midshipman. The moment
that happens, set yourself to becoming the best-informed man in the
agency on the account to which you are assigned. If, for example, it
is a gasoline account, read text books on the chemistry, geology and
distribution of petroleum products. Read all the trade journals in the
field. Read all the research reports and marketing plans that your
agency has ever written on the product. Spend Saturday mornings in
service stations, pumping gasoline and talking to motorists. Visit
your client’s refineries and research laboratories. Study the advertising of his competitors. At the end of your second year, you will
know more about gasoline than your boss; you will then be ready to
succeed him.
Most of the young men in agencies are too lazy to do this kind
of homework. They remain permanently superficial.
Claude Hopkins attributed his success to the fact that he worked
twice as long hours as other copywriters, and thus made his way up
the ladder at twice their speed. One of the best agencies born in the
last forty years owes its supremacy to the fact that its founder was so
unhappy with his wife that he rarely left the office before midnight.
In my bachelor days I used to work until the small hours. If you prefer to spend all your spare time growing roses or playing with your
children, I like you better, but do not complain that you are not being
promoted fast enough. Managers promote the men who produce the
most.
If people in advertising agencies were paid on a piece-work basis, the drones would get their just deserts and the dynamos would
triumph even faster than they do now. When Dr. William B.
Shockley studied the creativity of scientists in the Bell Laboratories,

he discovered that those in the most creative quartile applied for ten
times as many patents as those in the least creative quartile, but were
paid only 50 per cent more. Unfair? Yes, I think so. Albert Lasker
used to pay the less productive copywriters at Lord & Thomas $1000
a week, but he paid Claude Hopkins $50,000 for every $1,000,000
worth of advertising he wrote. A profitable time was had by all—
Lasker, Hopkins and their clients.
Nowadays it is the fashion to pretend that no single individual is
ever responsible for a successful advertising campaign. This emphasis on “team-work” is bunkum—a conspiracy of the mediocre majority. No advertisement, no commercial and no image can be created
by a committee. Most top managements are secretly aware of this,
and keep their eyes open for those rare individuals who lay golden
eggs. These champions can no longer be rewarded on the Hopkins
scale, but they are the only men in advertising agencies who are immune to the threat of dismissal in. times of scarcity. They give value
for money.
Most of the work you do in an agency will be routine maintenance. If you do it well, you will make gradual progress, but your
golden opportunity will come when you rise to a great occasion. The
trick is to recognize the great occasion when it presents itself.
Several years ago Lever Brothers asked their seven agencies to
submit policy papers on the television medium, which was then quite
new. The other agencies put in adequate papers of five or six pages,
but a young man on my staff took the trouble to assemble every conceivable statistic and, after working day and night for three weeks,
came up with an analysis which covered one hundred and seventyseven pages. His lazy colleagues sneered at him as a “compulsive
worker,” but one year later he was elected to our board of directors.
On such isolated incidents are most successful careers built. Il faut
epater les clients.
Most of the able young men who come into agencies nowadays
are determined to become account executives, probably because they
have been taught in business school that their mission in life is to
manage and administer rather than to do specialist work. It escapes
their attention that the heads of the six biggest agencies in the world
were all specialists before they reached the top. Four of them were
copywriters, one was in media and one in research. Not one of them
had ever been an account executive.
It is much more difficult to make your mark as an account executive than as a specialist, because it is rare for an account executive to have an opportunity to cover himself with glory; almost all
the spectacular triumphs are performed by the specialists. I would

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
therefore advise my own son to specialize—in media, research or
copy. He would find the competition less formidable in these departments, he would find more frequent opportunities to rise above
routine maintenance work, and he would acquire an expertise which
gives a man security—psychological and financial.
Perhaps some young men are attracted by the travel and entertainment which attach to the work of an account executive. They
will quickly find that lunching in good restaurants is no fun if you
have to explain a declining share-of-market while eating the souffle;
and riding the circuit of test markets can be a nightmare if one of
your children is in the hospital.
If my son ignored my advice and became an account executive,
I would offer him this advice:
(1) Sooner or later, a client will blackball you—either because
he dislikes you, or because you have failed him, or because he attributes to you what is really the failure of some service department
in your agency. When this happens to you, don’t be downhearted! I
know the head of an agency who survived being blackballed by three
clients in one year.
(2) You can probably get by if you never function as more than
a mere channel of communication between your client and your service departments, like a waiter who shuttles between the chefs in the
kitchen and the customers in the dining room. Such account executives are better called “contact men.” No doubt you will perform this
necessary function with aplomb, but I hope you will see your job in
larger terms. Good account executives acquire the most complicated
expertise of all: they become marketers.
(3) However hard you work, and however knowledgeable you
become, you will be unable to represent your agency at the client’s
policy levels until you are at least thirty-five. One of my partners
owes the rapidity of his ascent to the fact that he went bald when he
was thirty, and another had the good fortune to become whiteheaded at forty. Be patient.
(4) You will never become a senior account executive unless
you learn to make good presentations. Most of your clients will be
large corporations, and you must be able to sell plans and campaigns
to their committees. Good presentations must be well written, and
well delivered. You can learn to write them well by studying the
work of your masters, and by taking pains. You can learn to deliver
them well by observing the techniques of the professionals—notably
the Nielsen presenters.
(5) Do not make the common mistake of regarding your clients
as hostile boobs. Make friends with them. Behave as if you were on
their team. Buy shares in their company. Try not to become entangled in their politics; it would be a pity to lose an account because
you backed the wrong horse. Emulate Talleyrand, who served
France through seven regimes, and the Vicar of Bray—“Whatsoever
king shall reign, I will be the Vicar of Bray, sir!”
(6) In your day-to-day negotiations with clients and colleagues,
fight for the kings, queens and bishops, but throw away the pawns. A
habit of graceful surrender on trivial issues will make you difficult to
resist on those rare occasions when you must stand and fight on a
major issue.
(7) Don’t discuss your client’s business in elevators, and keep
their secret papers under lock and key. A reputation for leaking may
ruin you.
(8) When you want to plant an idea in the mind of a copywriter
or research director, do it privately and tactfully. The poacher is not
popular on Madison Avenue.
(9) If you are brave about admitting your mistakes to your clients and your colleagues, you will earn their respect. Candor, objec-

tivity and intellectual honesty are a sine qua поп for the advertising
careerist.
(10) Learn to write lucid interoffice memoranda. Remember
that the senior people to whom they are addressed have more on
their plates—and in their brief cases—than you do; the longer your
memos, the less likely they are to be read by men who have the
power to act on them. In 1941 Winston Churchill sent the following
memo to the First Lord of the Admiralty:
Pray state this day, on one side of a sheet of paper, how the
Royal Navy is being adapted to meet the conditions of modern warfare. [Italics mine.]
Never forget that you are paid more than your contemporaries
in other businesses and professions. There are three reasons for this.
First, the demand for able advertising men is greater than the supply.
Second, the fringe benefits, while substantial, are less than you
would receive in the Army or many manufacturing corporations.
Third, there is less security of tenure in advertising than in most
other jobs. Try your damnedest to keep your expenditure below your
income, so that you can survive a period of unemployment. Take up
the options you are given to buy stock in your agency. And invest in
other directions. Social Security is mighty short commons for an advertising agent of sixty-five.
I have come to think that one of the most revealing signs of a
young man’s capacity is the use he makes of his vacations. Some
fritter away those precious three weeks, while some get more out of
them than all the rest of the year put together. I offer this recipe for
refreshing vacations:
Don’t stay at home and putter around the house. You need a
change of scene.
Take your wife, but leave the children with a neighbor. Small
fry are a pain in the neck on a vacation. Shut yourself off from exposure to advertising.
Take a sleeping pill every night for the first three nights.
Get plenty of fresh air and exercise.
Read a book every day—twenty-one books in three weeks. (I
assume that you have already taken the Book-of-the-Month Club’s
rapid reading course, and that you can do 1,000 words a minute.)
Broaden your horizons by going abroad, even if you have to
travel steerage. But don’t travel so much that you come back cross
and exhausted.
The psychiatrists say that everybody should have a hobby. The
hobby I recommend is advertising. Pick a subject about which your
agency knows too little, and make yourself an authority on it. Plan to
write one good article every year, and place it in the Harvard Business Review. Rewarding subjects: the psychology of retail pricing,
new ways to establish the optimum advertising budget, the use of
advertising by politicians, obstacles which prevent international advertisers’ using the same campaigns all over the world, the conflict
between reach and frequency in media planning. Once you become
the acknowledged authority on any of these troublesome subjects,
you will be able to write your own ticket.
In short, put your shoulder to the wheel, but be careful to pick
the right wheel. Says Sophie Tucker, “I’ve been rich and I’ve been
poor. Believe me, honey, rich is best.”

38

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man

XI
Should Advertising Be Abolished?

NOT long ago Lady Hendy, my Socialist elder sister, invited
me to agree with her that advertising should be abolished. I found it
difficult to deal with this menacing suggestion, because I am neither
an economist nor a philosopher. But at least I was able to point out
that opinion is divided on the question.
The late Aneurin Bevan thought that advertising was “an evil
service.” Arnold Toynbee (of Winchester and Balliol) “cannot think
of any circumstances in which advertising would not be an evil.”
Professor Galbraith (Harvard) holds that advertising tempts people
to squander money on “unneeded” possessions when they ought to
be spending it on public works.
But it would be a mistake to assume that every liberal shares the
Bevan-Toynbee-Galbraith view of advertising. President Franklin
Roosevelt saw it in a different light:
If I were starting life over again, I am inclined to think that I
would go into the advertising business in preference to almost any
other. . . . The general raising of the standards of modern civilization
among all groups of people during the past half century would have
been impossible without the spreading of the knowledge of higher
standards by means of advertising.
Sir Winston Churchill agrees with Mr. Roosevelt:
Advertising nourishes the consuming power of men. It sets up
before a man the goal of a better home, better clothing, better food
for himself and his family. It spurs individual exertion and greater
production.
Almost all serious economists, of whatever political color, agree
that advertising serves a useful purpose when it is used to give information about new products. Thus Anastas L. Mikoyan, the Russian:
The task of our Soviet advertising is to give people exact information about the goods that are on sale, to help to create new demands, to cultivate new tastes and requirements, to promote the sale
of new kinds of goods and to explain their uses to the consumer. The
primary task of Soviet advertising is to give a truthful, exact, apt and
striking description of the nature, quality and properties of the goods
advertised.
The Victorian economist Alfred Marshall also approved of “informative” advertising for new products, but condemned what he
called “combative” advertising as a waste. Walter Taplin of the London School of Economics points out that Marshall’s analysis of advertising “shows indications of those prejudices and emotional atti-

tudes to advertising from which nobody seems to be completely free,
not even classical economists.” There was, indeed, a streak of prissiness in Marshall; his most illustrious student, Maynard Keynes, once
described him as “an utterly absurd person.” What Marshall wrote
about advertising has been cribbed by many later economists, and it
has become orthodox doctrine to hold that “combative”—or “persuasive”—advertising is economic waste. Is it?
My own clinical experience would suggest that the kind of informative factual advertising which the dons endorse is more effective, in terms of sales results, than the “combative” or “persuasive”
advertising which they condemn. Commercial self-interest and academic virtue march together.
If all advertisers would give up flatulent puffery, and turn to the
kind of factual, informative advertising which I have provided for
Rolls-Royce, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, and Shell, they would not
only increase their sales, but they would also place themselves on
the side of the angels. The more informative your advertising, the
more persuasive it will be.
In a recent poll conducted among thought-leaders, Hill &
Knowlton asked, “Should advertisers give the facts and only the
facts?” The vote in favor of this austere proposition was strikingly
affirmative:

Religious leaders
Editors of highbrow publications
High school administrators
Economists
Sociologists
Government officials
Deans of colleges
Business leaders

YES
76%
74
74
73
62
45
33
23

Thus we see that factual advertising is very widely regarded as a
Good Thing. But when it comes to “persuasive” advertising for one
old brand against another, the majority of economists follow Marshall in condemning it. Rexford Tugwell, who earned my undying
admiration for inspiring the economic renaissance of Puerto Rico,
condemns the “enormous waste involved in the effort to turn trade
from one firm to another.” The same dogma comes from Stuart
Chase:
Advertising makes people stop buying Mogg’s soap, and start
buying Bogg’s soap. . . . Nine-tenths and more of advertising is
39

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
largely competitive wrangling as to the relative merits of two undistinguished and often undistinguishable compounds. . . .
Pigou, Braithwaite, Baster, Warne, Fairchild, Morgan, Boulding, and other economists say essentially the same thing, many of
them in almost the same words, except that they leave Mogg & Bogg
to Stuart Chase, substituting Eureka & Excelsior, Tweedledum &
Tweedledee, Bumpo & Bango. Read one of them, and you have read
them all.
I will let these dons in on a curious secret. The combativepersuasive kind of advertising which they condemn is not nearly as
profitable as the informative kind of advertising which they approve.
My experience has been that it is relatively easy for advertising
to persuade consumers to try a new product. But they grow maddeningly deaf to the advertising of products which have been around for
a long time.
Thus we advertising agents get more mileage out of advertising
new products than old ones. Once again, academic virtue and commercial self-interest march together.
Does advertising raise prices? There has been too much sloppy
argument on both sides of this intricate question. Few serious studies
have been made of the effect of advertising on prices. However, Professor Neil Borden of Harvard has examined hundreds of case histories. With the aid of an advisory committee of five other formidable
professors, he reached conclusions which should be more widely
studied by other dons before they pop off on the economics of advertising. For example, “In many industries the large scale of operations
made possible in part through advertising has resulted in reductions
in manufacturing costs.” And, “the building of the market by means
of advertising and other promotional devices not only makes price
reductions attractive or possible for large firms, it also creates an opportunity to develop private brands, which generally are offered at
lower prices.” Indeed they are; when I am dead and opened, you
shall find not “Calais” lying in my heart, as Mary Tudor prophesied
would be found in hers, but “Private Brands.” They are the natural
enemies of us advertising agents. Twenty per cent of total grocery
sales are now private brands, owned by retailers and not advertised.
Bloody parasites.
Professor Borden and his advisers reached the conclusion that
advertising, “though certainly not free from criticism, is an economic
asset and not a liability.” * Thus did they agree with Churchill and
Roosevelt. However, they did not support all the shibboleths of
Madison Avenue. They found, for example, that advertising does not
give consumers sufficient information. My experience at the working level leads me to agree.
It is worth listening to what the men who pay out huge sums of
their stockholders’ money for advertising say about its effect on
prices. Here is Lord Heyworth, the former head of Unilever:
Advertising . . . brings savings in its wake. On the distribution
side it speeds up the turnover of stock and thus makes lower retail
margins possible, without reducing the shopkeeper’s income. On the
manufacturing side it is one of the factors that make large scale production possible and who would deny that large scale production
leads to lower costs?
Essentially the same thing has recently been said by Howard
Morgens, the President of Procter & Gamble:
*

1942)

The Economics of Advertising, Richard D. Irwin (Chicago,

Time and again in our company, we have seen the start of advertising on a new type of product result in savings that are considerably greater than the entire advertising cost. . . . The use of advertising clearly results in lower prices to the public.
In most industries the cost of advertising represents less than 3
per cent of the price consumers pay at retail. But if advertising were
abolished, you would lose on the swings much of what you saved on
the roundabouts. For example, you would have to pay a fortune for
the Sunday New York Times if it carried no advertising. And just
think how dull it would be. Jefferson read only one newspaper, “and
that more for its advertisements than its news.” Most housewives
would say the same.
Does advertising encourage monopoly? Professor Borden found
that “in some industries advertising has contributed to concentration
of demand and hence has been a factor in bringing about concentration of supply in the hands of a few dominant firms.” But he concluded that advertising is not a basic cause of monopoly. Other
economists have proclaimed that advertising contributes to monopoly. I agree with them. It is becoming progressively more difficult
for small companies to launch new brands. The entrance fee, in
terms of advertising, is now so large that only the entrenched giants,
with their vast war chests, can afford it. If you don’t believe me, try
launching a new brand of detergent with a war chest of less than
$10,000,000.
Furthermore, the giant advertisers are able to buy space and
rime far more cheaply than their little competitors, because the media owners cosset them with quantity discounts. These discounts encourage big advertisers to buy up little ones; they can do the same
advertising at 25-per-cent less cost, and pocket the saving.
Does advertising corrupt editors? Yes it does, but fewer editors
than you may suppose. The publisher of a magazine once complained to me, in righteous indignation, that he had given one of my
clients five pages of editorial and had received in return only two
pages of advertising. But the vast majority of editors are incorruptible.
Harold Ross resented advertising, and once suggested to his
publisher that all advertisements in The New Yorker should be put on
one page. His successor exhibits the same sort of town-and-gown
snobbery, and loses no opportunity to belittle what he calls “admen.” Not long ago he published a facetious attack on two of my
campaigns, sublimely indifferent to the fact I have filled 1,173 pages
of his magazine with uncommonly ornamental advertisements. It
strikes me as bad manners for a magazine to accept one of my advertisements and then attack it editorially— like inviting a man to dinner and then spitting in his eye.
I have often been tempted to punish editors who insult my clients. When one of our advertisements for the British Industries Fair
appeared in an issue of the Chicago Tribune which printed one of
Colonel McCormick’s ugly diatribes against Britain, I itched to pull
the campaign out of his paper. But to do so would have blown a gaping hole in our coverage of the Middle West, and might well have
triggered a brouhaha about advertising pressure on editors.
Can advertising foist an inferior product on the consumer? Bitter experience has taught me that it cannot. On those rare occasions
when I have advertised products which consumer tests found inferior
to other products in the same field, the results have been disastrous.
If I try hard enough, I can write an advertisement which will persuade consumers to buy an inferior product, but only once—and
most of my clients depend on repeat purchases for their profit. Phi-

40

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
neas T. Barnum was the first to observe that “you may advertise a
spurious article and induce many people to buy it once, but they will
gradually denounce you as an impostor.” Alfred Politz and Howard
Morgens believe that advertising can actually accelerate the demise
of an inferior product. Says Morgens, “The quickest way to kill a
brand that is off in quality is to promote it aggressively. People find
out about its poor quality just that much more quickly.”
He goes on to point out that advertising has come to play a significant part in product improvement:
Research people, of course, are constantly searching for ways to
improve the things we buy. But believe me, a great deal of prodding
and pushing and suggestions for those improvements also comes
from the advertising end of the business. That’s bound to be, because
the success of a company’s advertising is closely tied up with the
success of its product development activities.
. . . Advertising and scientific research have come to work
hand-in-glove on a vast and amazingly productive scale. The direct
beneficiary is the consumer, who enjoys an ever-widening selection
of better products and services.
On more than one occasion I have been instrumental in persuading clients not to launch a new product until they could develop one
which would be demonstrably superior to those already on the market.
Advertising is also a force for sustaining standards of quality
and service. Writes Sir Frederic Hooper of Schweppes:
Advertising is a guarantee of quality. A firm which has spent a
substantial sum advocating the merits of a product and accustoming
the consumer to expect a standard that is both high and uniform, dare
not later reduce the quality of its goods. Sometimes the public is gullible, but not to the extent of continuing to buy a patently inferior article.
When we started advertising KLM Royal Dutch Airlines as
“punctual” and “reliable,” their top management sent out an encyclical, reminding their operations staff to live up to the promise of our
advertising.
It may be said that a good advertising agency represents the
consumer’s interest in the councils of industry.
Is advertising a pack of lies? No longer. Fear of becoming embroiled with the Federal Trade Commission, which tries its cases in
the newspapers, is now so great that one of our clients recently
warned me that if any of our commercials were ever cited by the
FTC for dishonesty, he would immediately move his account to another agency. The lawyer at General Foods actually required that our
copywriters prove that Open-Pit Barbecue Sauce has an “oldfashioned flavor” before he would allow us to make this innocuous
claim in advertisements. The consumer is better protected than she
knows.
I cannot always keep pace with the changing rules laid down by
the various bodies that regulate advertising. The Canadian Government, for example, applies one set of rules to patent medicine advertising, and the United States Government a totally different set.
Some American states prohibit the mention of price in whiskey advertisements, while others insist upon it; what is forbidden in one
state is obligatory in another. I can only take refuge in the rule which
has always governed my own output: never write an advertisement
which you wouldn’t want your own family to see.

Dorothy Sayers, who wrote advertisements before she wrote
whodunits and Anglo-Catholic tracts, says: “Plain lies are dangerous. The only weapons left are the suggestio falsi and the suppressio
veri.” I plead guilty to one act of suggestio falsi— what we on Madison Avenue call a “weasel.” However, two years later a chemist rescued my conscience by discovering that what I had falsely suggested
was actually true.
But I must confess that I am continuously guilty of suppressio
veri. Surely it is asking too much to expect the advertiser to describe
the shortcomings of his product? One must be forgiven for putting
one’s best foot forward.
Does advertising make people want to buy products they don’t
need? If you don’t think people need deodorants, you are at liberty
to criticize advertising for having persuaded 87 per cent of American
women and 66 per cent of American men to use them. If you don’t
think people need beer, you are right to criticize advertising for having persuaded 58 per cent of the adult population to drink it. If you
disapprove of social mobility, creature comforts, and foreign travel,
you are right to blame advertising for encouraging such wickedness.
If you dislike affluent society, you are right to blame advertising for
inciting the masses to pursue it.
If you are this kind of Puritan, I cannot reason with you. I can
only call you a psychic masochist. Like Archbishop Leighton, I pray,
“Deliver me, О Lord, from the errors of wise men, yea, and of good
men.”
Dear old John Burns, the father of the Labor movement in England, used to say that the tragedy of the working class was the poverty of their desires. I make no apology for inciting the working class
to desire less Spartan lives.
Should advertising be used in politics? I think not. In recent
years it has become fashionable for political parties to employ advertising agencies. In 1952 my old friend Rosser Reeves advertised
General Eisenhower as if he were a tube of toothpaste. He created
fifty commercials in which the General was made to read out handlettered answers to a series of phony questions from imaginary citizens. Like this:
Citizen: Mr. Eisenhower, what about the high cost of living?
General: My wife Mamie worries about the same thing. I tell
her it’s our job to change that on November 4th.
Between takes the General was heard to say, “To think that an
old soldier should come to this.”
Whenever my agency is asked to advertise a politician or a political party, we refuse the invitation, for these reasons:
1i) The use of advertising to sell statesmen is the ultimate vulgarity.
(2) If we were to advertise a Democrat, we would be unfair to
the Republicans on our staff; and vice versa.
However, I encourage my colleagues to do their political duty
by working for one of the parties—as individuals. If a party or a
candidate requires technical advertising services, such as the buying
of network time to broadcast political rallies, he can employ expert
volunteers, banded together in an ad hoc consortium.
Should advertising be used in good causes of a nonpolitical nature? We advertising agents derive modest satisfaction from the
Work we do for good causes. Just as surgeons devote much of their
time to operating on paupers without remuneration, so we devote
much of our time to creating campaigns for charity patients. For ex-

41

David Ogilvy – Confessions of an Advertising Man
ample, my agency created the first campaign for Radio Free Europe,
and in recent years we have created campaigns for the American
Cancer Society, the United States Committee for the United Nations,
the Citizens Committee To Keep New York City Clean, and Lincoln
Center for the Performing Arts. The professional services we have
donated to these causes have cost us about $250,000, which is
equivalent to our profit on $12,000,000 of billing.
In 1959 John D. Rockefeller III and Clarence Francis asked me
to increase public awareness of Lincoln Center, which was then in
the planning stage. A survey revealed that only 25 per cent of the
adult population of New York had heard of Lincoln Center. When
our campaign was concluded, one year later, 67 per cent had heard
of Lincoln Center. When I presented the plans for this campaign, I
said:
The men who conceived Lincoln Center, and particularly the
big foundations which have contributed to it, would be dismayed if
the people of New York came to think of Lincoln Center as the preserve of the upper crust. ... It is, therefore, important to create the
right image: Lincoln Center is for all the people.
A survey conducted at the conclusion of the campaign showed
that this democratic objective had been fulfilled. Those interviewed
were presented with statements, and asked which they agreed with.
Here are their votes:
Probably most people living in
New York and its suburbs will visit
Lincoln Center at one time or another
Lincoln Center is only for wealthier people

76%

4%

Most campaigns for good causes are contributed by one volunteer agency, but in the case of Lincoln Center, BBDO, Young & Rubicam, and Benton & Bowles volunteered to work in harness with
us—a remarkable and harmonious quartet. The television commercials were made by BBDO, and New York stations donated
$600,000 worth of rime to running them. The radio commercials
were made by Benton & Bowles, and the radio stations donated
$100,000 worth of time to running them. The printed advertisements
were made by Young & Rubicam and ourselves; Reader’s Digest,
The New Yorker, Newsweek, and Cue ran them free.
When we volunteered to take over the campaign to Keep New
York City Clean, the number of streets rated clean had already increased from 56 per cent to 85 per cent. I concluded that those still
littering must form a hard core of irresponsible barbarians who could
not be reformed by amiable slogans like the previous agency’s “Cast
Your Ballot Here for a Cleaner New York.”
A poll revealed that the majority of New Yorkers were not
aware that they could be fined twenty-five dollars for littering. We
therefore developed a tough campaign, warning litterbugs that they
would be hauled into court. At the same time we persuaded the New

Yock Sanitation Department to recruit a flying squad of uniformed
men to patrol the streets on motor scooters, in search of offenders.
The newspapers and magazines donated an unprecedented amount of
free space to running our advertisements, and in the first three
months the New York television and radio stations gave us 1,105.
free commercials. After four months, 39,004 summonses had1 been
handed out, and the magistrates did their duty.
Is advertising a vulgar bore? C. A. R. Crosland thunders in The
New Statesman that advertising “is often vulgar, strident and offensive. And it induces a definite cynicism and corruption in both practitioners and audience owing to the constant intermingling of truth
and lies.”
This, I think, is now the gravamen of the charge against advertising among educated people. Ludwig von Mises describes advertising as “shrill, noisy, coarse, puffing.” He blames the public, as not
reacting to dignified advertising; I am more inclined to blame the
advertisers and the agencies—including myself. I must confess that I
am a poor judge of what will shock the public. Twice I have produced advertisements which seemed perfectly innocent to me, only
to be excoriated for indecency. One was an advertisement for Lady
Hathaway shirts, which showed a beautiful woman in velvet trousers, sitting astride a chair and smoking a long cigar. My other transgression was a television commercial in which we rolled Ban deodorant into the armpit of a Greek statue. In both cases the symbolism, which had escaped me, inflamed more prurient souls.
I am less offended by obscenity than by tasteless typography,
banal photographs, clumsy copy, and cheap jingles. It is easy to skip
these horrors when they appear in magazines and newspapers, but it
is impossible to escape them on television. I am angered to the point
of violence by the commercial interruption of programs. Are the men
who own the television stations so greedy that they cannot resist
such intrusive affronts to the dignity of man? They even interrupt the
inauguration of Presidents and the coronation of monarchs.
As a practitioner, I know that television is the most potent advertising medium ever devised, and I make most of my living from
it. But, as a private person, I would gladly pay for the privilege of
watching it without commercial interruptions. Morally, I find myself
between the rock and the hard place.
It is television advertising which has made Madison Avenue the
arch-symbol of tasteless materialism. If governments do not soon set
up machinery for the regulation of television, I fear that the majority
of thoughtful men will come to agree with Toynbee that “the destiny
of our Western civilization turns on the issue of our struggle with all
that Madison Avenue stands for.” I have a vested interest in the survival of Madison Avenue, and I doubt whether it can survive without
drastic reform.
Hill & Knowlton report that the vast majority of thought-leaders
now believe that advertising promotes values that are too materialistic. The danger to my bread-and-butter arises out of the fact that
what thought-leaders think today, the majority of voters are likely to
think tomorrow. No, my darling sister, advertising should not be
abolished. But it must be reformed.

42



======================================================================
FILE: Breakthrough_Advertising_DATASET.txt
======================================================================

FOREWORD

Welcome to the most sought after
direct marketing masterpiece. This book was recently selling for
over $900 dollars used—so I decided to re-issue it. It is a real
privilege to bring Gene Schwartz's advertising wisdom back into
print. We built a wonderful business based on his wisdom.
He was a special delight and a treat to know—Gene was
6'2" and reminded me of Gary Cooper in The Fountainhead. But
Gene had much more charm and wit and a fabulous, unforgettable smile.
Exciting sight—watching the multi-talented genius's fingers
flying over the keyboard creating another brilliant ad. And then
he'd sit back with that great smile, read it over and enjoy it more
and more.
Gene wrote advertising copy lor the best direct marketers
in America. And then he published a book in 1964 titled Hoxc
to Double Your Child's Grades in School, following up with How
to Double Your Power to Learn and then Breakthrough Advertising in 1966.
He was very clever—he exchanged his copywriting for access to mailing list names and promoted his own books to them!
But then Gene had a stroke in 1978 and he had trouble
typing . . . for it affected his right side. But he worked and
iii

IV

FOREWORD

worked until he became quite proficient typing with just his
left hand.
My big idea—Retain Gene as a business consultant instead
of a copywriter to guarantee him a regular income. He became
very important to us in that new role. l i e helped very much in
the creation of the Bottom Line/Personal concept and of our editorial style. Awesome.
Then there was Gene III, the scientist, always reading the
leading-edge science books and belonging to a very sophisticated
group that met weekly to discuss the implications of those scientific advances on society.
Finally, there was Gene IV—an amazing talent as an art collector, together with his wife Barbara, a famous interior designer.
They built a fabulous art collection betting on Hans Hoffman
Morris Lewis, Frank Stella, Donald Judd and Milton Averv well
before anyone else had heard of them. Their first acquisition was
by the color-pioneer Hans Hoffman. It took me years to appreciate Hoffman's work. Barbara also helped me build an incredible collection of photographs that are now at the Art Institute of
Chicago. On my first gallery tour with them—I discovered a
crumpled photo by the Starn twins that had two words on i t Confusion/Order. That is what I'm devoted t o - b r i n g i n g order
from confusion. So Barbara and I built a very exciting Lessons
in Life collection. I was her first art advisory client. And it is
with her generous permission that we bring Gene's classic book
back into the world.
Martin Edelston
Founder and President. Boardroom Inc.
Publisher of Bottom Line/Personal
January 2004

PREFACE TO THE
BOARDROOM EDITION

This book was first published
in 1966—what seems to be three lifetimes ago. It was put out
bv Prentice-Hall, a marvelous house: it sold onlv a few thousand
copies. But since it was published I have had people coming to me
regularly to tell me that thev directlv credit reading this book with
their making millions of dollars.
This is amazing enough, but even more remarkable is the fact
that—when I look back on it—not a single one of these people
was a copywriter. Here is a book that is called Breakthrough Advertising . . . and yet was used bv men who were not in the business
of advertising at all, to make more monev than most of us ever
dream of accumulating.
How did this happen? Whv was a publisher, a financier, a
manufacturer of novelties, able to make so very much monev with
a book that is about putting sentences together? (The financier
told me that, within one vear after obtaining the book, he had
raised his net worth from $100.000 to $10 million). Are the
sentences contained in the pages that follow actually that powerful? Can they change the fortunes of men so radically? Are thev
far more universally adaptable than I had first t h o u g h t . . . so they
are no longer about advertising products, but literally about opening whole new markets for them?

\1

PREFACE

Therefore, eighteen years later, when Boardroom Books asked
me to republish this text. I had to study it again, with the fresh
eyes of a person who had not read it in all that time, to see what
was the real content of my book, and its real effect on its readers.
I did. I discovered the secret. And I am using this introduction now to admit my red-faced shame. What I had thought I had
written those mam- years ago was a book on advertising; what I
actually put down on these pages was an entireh' different book,
on a far broader theme:
There is a way to develop an entirely new market for a new
or an old product. That way involves a certain number of clearludefined steps. And in this hook 1 show „ou every single one of
J
those steps.
'
As you mav know, all of us—no matter what official designation we give the industry we do business m - a r e actually on a
deeper level, in exactly the same profession. We are all'simply
creating or exploiting markets for our products. When the market
is born, our business is simultaneously given birth. When it grows
so does our share of it. When it is mature, our sales charts develop
heir first aches and pains. And at that point, if we can develop a
fresh new- market for that old product, it is exactly as if we
achieved the Faustian dream, and enabled that product to drink
from the proverbial "Fountain of Youth."
We are all primarily conceptual midwives. helping g i v e birth to
new markets for our products. All the other functions" we or our
business, p e r f o r m - t h e manufacturing, distribution service
hnancmg, and all the r e s t - a r e simply adjuncts to this vital central
process.
We are, in a single phrase, "Market-Makers." We sense each
new market in its turn. We test and evaluate its size and scope We
gauge its true potential financial strength, and then we focus all
the people, all the money and all the desire that makes it up on
one ultimate object: our own product.
Most of the time, the market exists before our product, and
we simply tap its present strength. But, m this era of constant

PREFACE

Ml

change, we ourselves mav help give it its first viable financial
form. We may sense that people want computers in their homes
as well as their offices . . . or want to walk around all dav with
music plugged into their ears . . . or would like to spend three
air-conditioned hours in a faraway galaxv, battling with light-swords
against evil and tyranny.
Making a market, then, is not. as I thought when I originally
wrote this book, simply a matter of making an ad. It is also the
making of a product. And it is the making of a conduit through
which that product can be obtained bv the people whom you have
made desire it more than an equivalent sum of their money. This
book outwardly talks about the sentences that make up the primary appeal of that product to that market. But its true and
deeper message is found when it is interpreted as a market-diviner,
and a market-intensifier. In other words, its message will show vou
how to find your "dream" market, and how to drive it into a national "feeding frenzy."
And I have also made an equally important discovery upon
reviewing this book since it was first published. The examples in its
pages have grown slightly older, but the principles that these examples manifest are timeless. For example, if I were writing this
book today, its examples would show more appreciation of
feminism, environmental awareness, health and fitness striving—
even the blessed sexual revolution. Thev would be more open and
more frank than thev could have been then.
All this is for the good—but this book is not about revieiving
todm/s ads, but creating from scratch tomorrow's winners! This
book is about avoiding the need for copying or imitating am other
product or advertisement. So today's examples are as "outdated"
as those of two decades ago. This book is about what-happensnext, and the fundamental rules of making a fortune out of slightly redirecting that tomorrow.
You see, people don't change: only the direction of their desires do. They cannot be made to want anything, nor is it necessary to create want. All that is necessary is to be able to channel

v U1

PREFACE

those wants into the proper products that offer legitimate satisfaction for them. It takes ten million . . . fifteen million . . . twentvfive million. . . fifty-- million . . . one hundred and fifty million people
. . . to create a vast market for your goods. But it takes only one
slip of paper—or its recitation by a series of salesmen—to direct all
those millions of people to your stores, or vour catalogues, or your
wholesalers.
Not one single thing has changed in that regard since I wrote
this book. Nor will it ever alter in the slightest.
So this book is not about building better mousetraps. It is,
however, about building larger mice, and then building terrifying fear of them in your customers. In other words, it is about
helping to shape the largest and strongest market possible, and
then intensifying that market's reaction to its basic need or problem, and to the "exclusive" solution vou have to offer it.
Ask Rodale Press—for whom I sold over twentv million dollars of a single book, The Practical Encyclopedia of Natural
Healing.
Ask the publisher of this book. Boardroom Reports, Inc.—
who started out with $3,500 in total working capital, and who
will probably do more than 25 million dollars in gross volume
next year, with I am proud to say at least a little bit of assistance
from me.
Ask the seventeen businesses I've started or helped start. . .
(Twenty-five percent of just one of them was sold for close to a
million dollars in one dav.)
These principles work. They discover markets. Thev build
markets. They intensify markets. Thev revitalize markets. They
perform, in sum, the invaluable function of giving you customers
for the products you want or have to sell.
And that's what we all need, isn't it? Customers. This, therefore, is a book full of customers—for your products.
It is really nothing else. Just customers, by the millions.
Eighteen years have passed. Three lifetimes. They've been
good years, and good lives. I hadn't read the book since then, but

1A

PREFACE

some hidden part of me had remembered it, and I think it's worth
your reading now.
If vou agree with me, whv not write and tell me so. I have
several millionaires, and multimillionaires, to my credit now. I'd
like to make the next one YOU.
Please help me.
Gene Schwartz

DEDICATION

To BARBARA, who somehow, incredibly, still loves and always inspires me.

INTRODUCTION

Creativity Can Be Made to Order
If You Follow This Simple Rule
If you expect a scholarly tome on
advertising, stop here.
I am a mail order copy writer who makes his living by producing results—in carefully-measured dollars of profit—from the
written word.
My income—my standard of living—depends bluntly and directly upon my ability to sell. And I have no salesmen to help
me; no store-reputation to help me: no point-of-purchase reminders, no discounts, no friendly sales clerks to give mv products a push.
I sell, or do not sell, on the basis of one tool alone—my ad
Therefore, I have done a great deal of thinking and experimenting with these ads. And, since I have had the good fortune to
own my own mail order firms for the last eleven years, I have
had far greater freedom than most copy writers to put mv ideas
to a conclusive test and to see whether or not they really work.
I believe, as do many other advertising men, that mail order
is the greatest copy writing school in the world. In mail order

INTRODUCTION

XI

for reasons which I'll reveal later in this book, YOU learn techniques and approaches to copy—especially new-product and newslant copy—that you learn in no other branch of this business.
Some of these techniques I have never seen discussed in anv
other article or book on copv writing—and I think I've read most
of them. I have explained these techniques in detail in the hope
that they will prove as profitable to other eopv writers as they've
been for me.
Can they be used by non-mail-order eopv writers as well?
Most assuredly. J. K. Lasker once said that mail order makes a
copy writer, but his real pav-off comes when he applies his mail
order techniques to general advertising. I think that B.B.D. & O.,
Ted Bates, Ogilvy, Young & Rubicam and a dozen other agencies
prove this every day.
Therefore I've written this book—not from the mail order
perspective alone—but from the universal problem of all eopv writing: How to write a headline—and an ad that follows it—that will
open up an entirely new market for its product. An ad that will
give a new product immediate profit: that will give an old product a brand-new slant; that will give a competitively-battered product a new weapon—not onlv to protect itself against its imitators
but to actually damage or destrov the loyalty of their following.
These objectives cannot be achieved by following somebody
else's formula—no matter how successful it was for them. Thev
demand creativity Thev demand a brand-new headline; a brandnew approach to the market: a literal advertising "breakthrough."
Hence the title of this book.
This, then, is a practical book, of practical rules that produce, and exploit, creativity, and that are meant to pay off on the
very first ad. To put them to work, vou start with these basic
facts.

INTRODUCTION

Basic Facts of Life for Copy Writers
Writing copy is like playing the stock market, or being an
atomic physicist.
Basically all three of these professions—eopv writing, speculation and science—are exactly alike. The same keys make each
one of them work. And if you realize win. vou can double the
effectiveness of your copy overnight.
Consider these facts:
All three of them deal with immense natural forces gargantuan forces thousands of times more powerful than the men
who use them. In science, they are the fundamental energies of
the universe. In speculation, they are the billion-dollar tides and
currents of the market place. In copy writing thetj are the hopes
and fears and desires of millions upon millions of men and women,
all over the world.
The men who use these forces did not create them; thev
can neither turn them on nor shut them off thev can neither diminish them nor add to them. But they ran harness them! The
scientist did not create the energy of the sun; hut he can direct
that energy into the explosion of an atom bomb. The speculator
did not create the enormous growth of the electronics industry
after the war: but he can ride that growth to produce a fifty times
increase in his capital. And the copy writer does not create the
desire of millions of women all over America to lose weight; but
he can channel that desire onto a particular product, and make
its owner a millionaire.
This, then, is the end goal—to take these gigantic natural
forces and harness them to our own uses. But how do we do it?
No two of these forces are alike. Each is unique; each operates
in a different way The same formula, earefullv worked out to release atomic energy, fails complete])- to solve the problem of
rocket propulsion. The same pattern of investment, that spots the
upturn in electronics and makes a fortune, loses that fortune in
uranium. And the same advertising appeal, that builds an in-

INTRODl (

INTRODUCTION

™1

dustrv in reducing, collapses completely when applied to health
foods, even though both advertisements may reach exactly the
same audience.
Whv? Because no formula works twice. Each and every
formula is simplv the written solution to a particular problem that
occurred in the past. Change even one part of that problem, and
vou need an entirelv different formula. That's why memorizing
theories won't make vou a scientist, or studying charts won't make
you a market wizard, or rewriting somebody else's headlines won't
make vou a copy writer.
What will work? Innovation, of course. Continuous, repeated
innovation. A steady stream of new ideas—fresh new solutions to
new problems. Created—not by the impossible route of memory—but by analysis.
In afield in which the rales are constantly changing—where
the forces that determine the outcome are constantly shifting—
where new problems are constantly being encountered every day—
rules, formulas and principles simply will not work. They are too
rigid—too tightly bound to the past. They must he replaced by
the only known method of dealing with the Constantly New—
analysis.
And what is analysis? It is a series of measuring rods, cheekpoints, signpost questions that show you where a particular force
is going, and enable you to get there first. It is a series of rough
guesses, based on past successes, that enables you to cut through
the surface of a problem to see what makes it tick. Analysis is
the art of asking the right questions and letting the problem dictate the right answers. It is the technique of the break-through.
And it can be learned—just as surely as grammar, mathematics
or spelling.
The first part of this book is about analysis, applied to the
profession of copy writing. Its basic thesis is this:
Everv new market—everv new product—every newadvertisement is a fresh new problem that never existed
before on the face of this earth. Past advertising successes

CONTENTS

PART 1: THE BASIC STRATEGY OF PERSUASION 1
1 MASS DESntE: THE FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING
WORK—AND HOW TO FOCUS IT ONTO YOUR PRODUCT 3
What Is This Mass Desire—and How Is It Created? 4
Permanent Forces 6
The Forces of Change 6
How to Channel Mass Desire Onto Your Particular Product 7
The Analysis of Your Product: What It Is—and What It Does 9
2 YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS—HOW TO
CAPITALIZE ON IT WHEN YOU WTUTE YOUR HEADLINE 13
Your Headline's Real Job 14
What Your Prospect's State of
Awareness Demands From Your Headline 15
The Most Aware 16
The Customer Knows of the
Product But Doesn't Yet Want It 16
How to Introduce New Products 79
How to Introduce Products That Solve Needs 21
How to Open Up a Completely Unaware Market 23
Giving Words to a Hidden Dream 26
Exploiting a Hidden Fear 27
Leading Into an Unacceptable Problem by
Starting With a Universally Accepted Image 28
To Project a Hidden Desire
Which Cannot Be Put Bluntly Into Words 29
Using a Common Resentment or Unvoiced Protest
to Capture a Far Greater Market Than the Direct
Statement of the Solution of That Resentment Would Produce 30
Projecting an Ultimate Triumph That the Prospect Will Identify With 32
xv

CONTENTS

Projecting the Result of a Problem in Such a Way
That It Will Be Identified With by People Who Would
Reject a Direct Statement of the Problem Itself 3.3
Projecting the Result of an Accomplishment
to Attract People Who Would Be Frightened Away
by the Work Implied to Achieve It 34
The List Never Ends 34
A Final Word on Style in Advertising Copy 35
3 THE SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR M4RKET:
HOW MANY PRODUCTS HAVE BEEN THERE BEFORE YOU? 37
If You Are First in Your Market 37
If You're Second, Do This 3.9
The Third Stage of Sophistication 41
The Fourth Stage 44
How to Revive a "'Dead" Product 45
Let's Look at an Industry That Went
Through All Five Stages of Sophistication 46
A Personal Note 50
4 38 WAYS TO STRENGTHEN YOUR HEADLINE
ONCE YOU HAVE YOUR BASIC D3EA 51
5 SUMMARY: THE ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING—
HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA GROW 59
The Three Levels of Creativity 5.9
On Motivation Research and Its Relation to the Copy Writer 61
On Expressing the Personality of a Product in Your Headline 63
On the Only Type of Prevention Headline That Will Sell 64
On the Selection of Splinter Markets to Avoid Competition 65
In Summary 66
PART 2: THE SEVEN BASIC TECHNIQUES OF
BREAKTHROUGH ADVERTISING 69
6 INSDDE YOUR PROSPECT'S MIND—WHAT MAKES
PEOPLE READ, WANT, BELDZVE 71
Desires 72
Identifications 73
Beliefs 74

CONTENTS

7 THE FTRST TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY:
INTENSIFICATION 77
Thirteen Ways to Strengthen Desire 77
Your First Presentation of Your Claims HO
Put the Claims in Action 83
Bring In the Reader 85
Show Him How to Test Your Claims 86
Stretch Out Your Benefits in Time 87
Bring In an Audience 89
Show Experts Approving 90
Compare, Contrast, Prove Superiority 91
Picture the Black Side, Too 92
Show How Easy It Is To Get These Benefits 94
Use Metaphor, Analogy. Imagination 94
Before You're Done, Summarize 95
Put Your Guarantee to Work 99
How to Apply These Principles of Intensification to the Campaign
8 THE SECOND TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION 107
How to Build a Saleable Personality Into Your Product 107
A Personal Note 108
The Roles Your Prospect Desires 109
Character Roles 110
Achievement Roles 113
How to Put These Longings for
Identification to Work for Your Product 114
The Primary Image of Your Product 117
How to Build New Images Into Your Product 119
On the Limits to the Images Your Prospects Will Identify With
On Saleable Identifications Springing From
the Physical Product Itself 125
9 THE TfflRD TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION 129
How to Make Your Prospect Believe Your
Claims Before You State Them 729
What Exactly Is Belief? 130
The Architecture of Belief 133

101

124

CONTENTS

A New Definition of Awareness 134
A Detailed Example 135
How Belief Was Built Into the Opening 137
Goal Conclusions 139
The Ultimate Objective 141
A Restatement of Our Basic Theory 144
The Inclusion Question 145
Detailed Identification 145
Contradiction of Present (False) Beliefs 146
The Language of Logic 147
Syllogistic Thinking 149
Other Belief Forms 150
10 THE FOURTH TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY: REDEFINITION 153
How to Remove Objections to Your Product 153
Simplification 155
Escalation 160
Price Reduction 162
11 THE FIFTH TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION 165
How to Verbally Prove That Your Product Does What
You Claim 165
Verbal Proof 167
Stage One: Name the Mechanism 167
Stage Two: Describe the Mechanism 168
Stage Three: Feature the Mechanism 170
On the Importance of Mechanism When You Want
to Convince Your Reader That You're Giving Him a Bargain
12 THE SIXTH TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION 175
How to Destroy Alternate Ways for
Your Prospect to Satisfy His Desire 175
What Concentration Is 177
Let's See How He Does It 179
A Second Strategy 181
One Final Word on Concentration 184

171

CONTENTS

13 THE SEVENTH TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE 185
How to Borrow Conviction for Your Copy 185
Let's Look at a Few Examples 186
The Second Way to Borrow Believability 190
Believability-Borrowing Strategy #3 191
14 THE FINAL TOUCHES 195
Verification—How to Offer Authorities and Proof 196
Reinforcement—How to Make Two Claims Do the Work
of Four 200
Interweaving—How to Blend Emotion,
Image and Logic Into the Same Sentence 202
Sensitivity—How to Give Your Reader
What He Demands Step by Step Throughout the Copy 20o
Sample Ad #1 206
Sample Ad #2 210
Sample Ad #3 210
Sample Ad #4 211
See How the Structure Differs 214
Momentum—How to Draw Your
Reader Deeper and Deeper Into Your Copy 215
Mood—How to Pack Your Copy With Drama,
Excitement, Sincerity or Any Other Emotion You Wish 222
EPTLOGUE-A COPY WRITER'S LIBRARY 227
INDEX 229

PARTI
THE BASIC STRATEGY
OF PERSUASION
How to write a winning
headline that no one has
ever written before

1
MASS DESIRE:
THE FORCE THAT MAKES
ADVERTISING WORK
—AND HOW TO FOCUS
IT ONTO YOUR PRODUCT

Let's get right down to the heart
of the matter. The power, the force, the overwhelming urge to
own that makes advertising work, comes from the market itself,
and not from the copy. Copy cannot create desire for a product.
It can only take the hopes, dreams, fears and desires that already
exist in the hearts of millions of people, and focus those alreadyexisting desires onto a particular product. This is the copy writer's
task: not to create this mass desire—but to channel and direct it.
Actually, it would be impossible for any one advertiser to
spend enough money to actually create this mass desire. He can
only exploit it. And he dies when he tries to run against it.
This has been shown time and time again in the automotive
field, for example. In 1948, in order to display their rising standard of living, the American public decided they wanted a longer,
lower, wider car. Chrysler chose to buck the trend; and offered a

4

MASS DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

fine, functional car—with more head, leg and shoulder room
on the inside—but shorter and squatter on the outside. A
multimillion-dollar campaign was prepared bv one of the most
creative agencies in America. But the results—against the tide of
mass desire—were catastrophic.
In 1954, cars had become universallv long; and drivers were
appraising each other's car in terms of horsepower. Here was the
rise to dominance of a vast new public demand. The Twin-H
Hudson Hornet, the twin-exhaust Cadillac, the Chrysler 300—all
in turn exploited this trend, and rode it to gain millions of dollars in extra sales. The Ford Company decided to plav it down,
and devoted millions of advertising dollars to sell safety. Again,
the advertising ran into a wall of disinterest: results were nonexistent; and the next year Ford produced, and advertised, the
highest-horsepower engines in their history
YVut perhaps \Vie most pamTu\ prooY was the Edsel. H e r e was
a good car, backed by a deluge of fhu< advertising, that died trying to fight the overwhelming switch in demand to a cheap,
simple, inexpensive-to-run compact car.
Let me repeat. This mass desire must already be there. It
must already exist. You cannot create it. and vou cannot fight it.
But you can—and must—direct it, channel it. focus it onto your
particular
product.

What Is This Mass Desire—and How Is It Created?
We can define this Mass Desire quite simply. It is the public spread of a private want.
Advertising is a business of statistics. We deal with percentages of population. We address our ads to individuals; and yet
the success of our advertising depends on thousands, or even millions, of these individuals sharing the same response to these
ads—the response of wanting our product enough to pav us the
price we ask for it.

MASS DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

5

Before these individuals can share this buying response,
they must first share the desire upon which our ad is based.
Privately, each of them wants the same thing. Puhliclx. there
are enough of them to repay us the cost of advertising, manufacturing and selling, plus a profit. It is the moment alien a private desire is shared by a statistically significant number of
people, large enough to profitably repay selling these people,
that a market is born. This market mav consist of a desire shared
by only a few thousand people, such as the urge to own fine
antiques. Or it may be shared by tens of millions, as the desire
to lose weight. But it is there, demanding to be satisfied, waiting only for the information that will direct it onto a particular
product.
Since these mass desires are shared bv millions of people.
they take years to develop, and thev are created b\ social, economic and technological forces far greater than advertising itself
can command. It is this fact, when used correctly that gives advertising its enormous potential for profit. Bv simplv directing
this gigantic, already-existing mass desire—rather than being required to create it—advertising thus commands an economic force
hundreds of times more poiveifnl Hum the mere number of dollars that the advertiser can spend on it. This is the Amplification
Effect of successful advertising—the reason that $1 spent on such
advertising can create 850 or even SI00 in sales.
But this Amplification Effect takes place only when advertising exploits already-existing desire. When it tries to create this desire, it is no longer advertising but education. And, as education.
it can produce at best only one dollar in sales for every dollar
spent on advertising. No single advertiser can afford to educate
the American public. He must rely on forces far greater than any
advertising budget to build this mass desire. And then he can
make those forces work for him—by directing that desire onto his
particular product.
What are these nation-wide forces that create this mass
desire? There are many of them. But they fall into two general

6

MASS DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

categories—each presenting its distinct problem to the copy writer.
Here are these two categories, with a few specific examples of
each.
1. Permanent Forces
Mass Instinct. The desire of women to be attractive, or men
to be virile, or men and women both to keep their health. In
this case, the instinct never fades—the desire never changes. The
copy writer's problem here is not to pick out the trend—it is
there for everyone to see. His job is to distinguish his product
from the others that were there before it—to create a fresh appeal—to build a stronger believabilitv—to shift desire from the
fulfillment offered by one product to that offered bv another.
How this is done, we shall see in a moment.
A mass technological problem. Bad television reception, or
corroding automobile mufflers, or the time it takes for aspirin to
bring relief. Until the problem is finallv solved, the customers
will buy and try—buy and try again. And here the copy writer
has the same problem—to offer the same claim of relief as his
competitors, but offer it in a new way.
2. The Forces of Change
The beginning, the fulfillment, and the reversal of a trend.
Style. The sudden mass decision to show off a pay raise bv installing a swimming pool in the back yard, instead of buying a
bigger car. The horsepower appeal of the Fifties, and its sudden
subordination to gas economy. Here the copv writer is dealing
with the straws in the wind that may indicate a hurricane. Here
he needs sensitivity, foresight, intuition. He must be able to see
and catch the rising tide when it's almost imperceptible—sense
which of the several appeals that are built into his product he
should stress at any particular moment, and when to shift to another—and, always, how to be there first.

MASS DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

Mass Education. The school primer and the movie screen.
The tastes and appearances of society women, television stars,
presidential candidates, trickling down to every hamlet in
America. Group pressure; back-yard gossip; community product
pioneers. And equally important, the sum total of all advertising—in its unconscious, unplanned and overall effect of multiplying people's dreams and desires, and thus raising their standard of living. Here again the problem is timing. When does the
shift become statistically significant? When do enough people make
the change? When should the automotive powerhouse, for example, change its image to become the common man's gas saver?
The copy writer is faced with a society containing dozens—
even hundreds—of these already-existing mass desires. His first
joh therefore is to detect them—inventory them—chart their force
and direction. This is a study that will occupy part of every working dav for the rest of his life.
His second job is to harness his products onto their backs.
He does this in this wav:
How to Channel Mass Desire
Onto Your Particular Product
The copy writer in his work uses three tools: his own knowledge of people's hopes, dreams, desires and emotions; his client's
product; and the advertising message, which connects the two.
The copy writer performs his work in three stages. In general, thev go something like this:
1. Choose the most powerful desire that can possibly he applied to your product.
Every mass desire has three vital dimensions. The first is urgency, intensity, degree of demand to be satisfied. For example,
constant arthritic pains compared to a minor headache. The second dimension is staving power, degree of repetition, the inability to become satiated. For example, raw hunger compared to a
craving for gourmet foods. And the third dimension is scope—

ft>

MASS DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

the number of people who share this desire. For example, the
number of men willing to pay $10 for an automotive accessorv
that saves gas—as compared to those willing to pav the same
price for one that merely prevents future repair bills.
Every product appeals to two, three or four of these mass
desires. But only one can predominate; onlv one can reach out
through your headline to your customer. Only one is the key that
unlocks the maximum economic power at the particular time your
advertisement is published. Your choice among these alternate desires is the most important step yon will take in writing your ad.
If it is wrong, nothing else that you do in the ad will matter. This
choice is embodied in your headline. It is for this reason that we
spend so many chapters on headlines later on.
To sum up the first stage then, you trv to choose the mass
desire that gives you the most power in all three dimensions. You
try to tap a single overwhelming desire existing today in the hearts
and minds of millions of people who are actively seeking to satisfy it at this verv moment.
2. Acknowledge that desire—reinforce it—and/or offer the
means to satisfy it—in a single statement in the headline of
your ad.
This headline is the bridge between vour prospect and your
product. It touches your prospect at the point of awareness that
he has arrived at today. If he is aware of vour product, and realizes that it can satisfy his desire, vour headline starts with vour
product. If he is not aware of your product, but only of the desire itself, your headline starts with the desire. And, if he is not
yet aware of what he really seeks, but is concerned only with a
general problem, your headline starts with that problem and crystallizes it into a specific need.
In any case, your headline—though it mav never mention
your product—is the first vital step in recognizing this mass desire—justifying and intensifying it—and directing its solution along
one specific path.
3. And then you take the series of performances that are

MASS DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

9

built into your product—what your product does—and you show
your prospect how these product performances inevitably satisfy
that desire. Here's how:
The Analysis of Your Product:
What It Is—and What It D o e s
In reality, every product vou are given to sell is actually two
products. One of them is the physical product—the steel, glass,
paper or tobacco that the manufacturer has shaped into a particular pattern, of which he is justly proud. The other is the functional product—the product in action—the series of benefits that
vour product performs for vour consumer, and on the basis of
which he buys vour product.
The physical product does not sell. People do not buy the
steel in a car, the glass in a vase, the tobacco in a cigarette, or
the paper in a book.
The physical part of your product is of value only because
it enables your product to do things for people. The important
part of your product is what it does. The rest—the steel skeleton—the chrome or metal case that vou actually deliver to your
customer—is only your excuse for charging them your price. What
they are reallv paying you for is what the product will do.
No physical part of vour product can ever become a headline. No one will buy the size of vour clients plant, the weight
of vour client's steel, the care of vour client's construction. All
these facts can only be used, later on. to document and reinforce
the primary performance that vou promise your reader in your
headline, in the following wavs:
By justifying your price. This is the common-sense theory
that the longer the car, the more tubes in the television set, the
more stitches per inch in the suit, then the greater the number
of dollars your product can command—if that product first delivers the performance that your prospect demands.
By documenting the quality of your performance. Tell your

10

MASS DESIRE: T H E F O R C E THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

prospect the weight of steel in vour car's door, and he's more
likely to believe that your car will protect his life if he should
have an accident on the highway. Tell vour prospect the number
of times your plant removes the impurities in vour face cream,
and she's more likely to believe that vour cream will remove the
impurities in her skin.
By assuring your prospect that that performance will continue throughout the years. Ceramic mufflers mean no repair bills
for the life of your car. Chemically-protected paper means you
can hand your prize books down to vour children. Quick-frozen
food means vou can retain taste and vitamins for months after
your purchase.
By sharpening the reader's mental picture of that performance. The Rolls-Royce must give vou perfect riding silence because every metal part of the chassis is shielded from every other
metal part by a protective coat of rubber. Helena Rubenstein's
new face cream must make your skin look younger because it
contains the placenta of living animals.
And, above all, by giving your product's claim of performance
afresh new basis for believability. This is the most important use
of the physical product in fields where a new firm or product is
attempting to invade an established Mass Instinct field. Others
have made the same claim before. Your product, in order to pull
sales awav from them, must introduce a new mechanism that performs the claim, or a new quality that assures its performance,
or a new freedom from old limitations that improves the performance. This is the point of difference—often conceived by the
copy writer, and built bv the manufacturer into the product at
his recommendation. We shall discuss this point of difference
quite thoroughly in the next few chapters.
So much for the physical product. It is always subordinated
to the functional product—the product in action—what the product does.
It is the performance of your product, satisfying the mass
desire of your market, that provides the selling power of your ad.

MASS DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

11

Your first task, then, in studying your product, is to list the
number of different performances it contains—to group these
performances against the mass desires that each of them satisfies—and then to feature the one performance that will harness
the greatest sales power onto vour product at that particular time.
Take the automobile, for example. Every automobile offers
its prospective owner several different and distinct sets of
performances:
It offers him transportation. The ability to carry himself, his
family, his luggage, and perhaps tin the case of station wagons)
his pets and his furniture from place to place.
It offers him dependability. The freedom from breakdown,
stalling, poor performance, repair bills, embarrassment and inconvenience.
It offers him economy. Inexpensive transportation: savings in
both gas and oil; freedom from repair bills, seen this time from
the point of view of the pocket book: durability high trade-in
value, low insurance cost.
It offers him power. Number of horses at his command; takeoff at the lights: acceleration on hills and in traffic; top speed,
even if he never uses it. All adding up to a feeling of dominance
on the highway.
It offers him recognition. Admiration, status, subtle and accepted bragging, envy, the feeling of having arrived. The ohs and
ahs of his neighbors, the first ride, the very smell of a new car.
It offers him value. The number of feet of steel he can command for the price. High trade-in value over the years. The fact
that the car can last for 100,000 miles, even if he can afford to
trade it in every year.
It offers him novelty: Power steering five vears ago—electric door locks todav. Three-tone paint jobs vesterdav—iridescent
paints now. The thrill of being the leader, the pace-setter, the
proven pioneer.
And man\- more. Some of them hidden, never admitted,
discovered only recently bv motivation research. Dozens of

VZ

MASS

DESIRE: T H E FORCE THAT MAKES ADVERTISING WORK

different performances, built into the same product, each of
them reaching out and tapping a different desire—a distinct
public.
And yet your ad can feature onlv one of these performances;
can effectively tap only one mass desire at a time.
Your headline is limited by physical space. You have onlv
one glance of the reader's eye to stop him. He is preoccupiedhe is not looking for your product or your message—the span of
his attention will admit only one thought to penetrate his indifference during that glance.
If your first thought holds him. he will read the second. If
the second holds him, he will read the third. And if the third
thought holds him, he will probably read through your ad.
Every product gives you dozens of keys. But onlv one will
fit the lock. Your job is to find that one dominant performance
squeeze every drop of power out of it in your presentation—and
then convince your reader that that performance and that satisfaction can come onlv from your product.
The next four chapters will show von how to locate that one
dominant performance, and how to fasliion it into vour headline.
Once you have written that headline, then even other performance contained in your product simply reinforces and documents that main appeal, in exactly the same wav as the physical
product facts listed above.

2
YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE
OF AWARENESS—HOW TO
CAPITALIZE ON IT W H E N
YOU WRITE YOUR
HEADLINE

You have now completed the first
two stages in writing your ad. You have defined the mass desire
that makes up your market—for example, the desire to lose weight,
shared by millions of women all over America. And you have selected the one performance in vour product that satisfies that desire most deeply—for example, a liquid meal in a glass, delicious,
filling, already measured for you. as easy and pleasant to drink
as a chocolate malted.
This definition of vour market, and the selection of the product performance most likely to capture that market, forms the
core concept, or theme, of vour ad. You now know where you
are going to start—with your market; and where you are going
to end—with your product. The bridge between these two—their
meeting place—is your ad.
Your ad always begins with your market, and leads that
13

14

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

market inevitably into your product. The beginning of vour ad—
your headline—is the first step in this process. Therefore it concerns itself entirely with your market. It mav never even mention
your product or its performance. It is based entirely on the answer to these three questions:
1. What is the mass desire that creates this market? (Which
we have already discovered.)
2. How much do these people know today about the way
your product satisfies this desire? (Their State of Awareness.)
3. How many other products have been presented to them
before yours? (Their State of Sophistication.
The answer to question 1 gives von the nation-wide force
that creates your market. The answer to questions 2 and 3 gives
you the location of that market in relation to vour product. Your
strategy for exploiting or overcoming the answers to these last
two questions will give you the content of vour headline. Let's
first re-define the job we are going to ask our headline to do,
and then see how each of these last two questions tells us what
that headline should—and should not—saw

Your Headline's Real Job
There has been much confusion about how much of a selling job your headline should be required to do. Actually, your
headline does not need to sell at all. It does not have to mention
your product. It does not even have to mention vour main appeal. To demand that a headline should do any of these is to
place the full selling burden on approximately 10% to 20% of
the total physical space of your ad . . . that physical space taken
up by the headline itself.
Your headline has only one job—to stop your prospect and
compel him to read the second sentence of your ad. In exactly
the same way, your second sentence has only one job—to force
him to read the third sentence of vour ad. And the third sentence

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

15

—and every additional sentence in your ad—has exactly the
same job.
It is simply common sense that the more of vour storv vou
can force your prospect to read, the more thoroughly you can sell
him. To attempt to do the same selling job in ten words, instead
of a hundred, or a thousand, is to shoot craps with vour clients
money. You might as well bnv only enough space to print vour
headline, and use the rest of the budget for repeat insertions.
It is the copy writer's job to force the prospect to read his
client's full story—not just a skimmed version of it. Only to
prospects actively seeking the client's specific brand-name product, and in a case where you can offer them a special price reduction, can your headline do the full selling job. To attempt a
complete selling job with anv other kind of headline is simply to
admit defeat.

What Your Prospect's State of
Awareness Demands From Your Headline
We have already assumed that the only reader you are looking for is the prospect for vour product. That means that he
shares a defined desire with thousands, and perhaps even millions, of other people all over America. But how much aware is
that prospect of that desire? How close is it to the surface of his
consciousness? Is he aware only that a problem or need exists,
or is he aware if they can be satisfied? And if he is aware that
a means of satisfaction exists, does he realize that it lies in your
iiroup of products, or specifically in your product by name, or
more specifically in your product at a given price?
The answer to these questions will help you determine the
State of Awareness of your market—their present state of knowledge about your product and the satisfaction that your product
performs. It is at this precise point of awareness that vour headline begins.

16

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

In its natural development, everv market's awareness passes
through several stages. The more aware your market, the easier
the selling job, the less vou need to sav. Let's go down the awareness scale step by step. We'll start at the Most Aware—the most
mechanical selling job—and proceed to more and more difficult
problems, requiring more and more creative solutions.
1. The Most Aware
The customer knows of your product—knows what it does—
knows he wants it. At this point, he just hasn't gotten around to
buying it yet. Your headline—in fact, vour entire ad—need state
little more except the name of your product and a bargain price.
For example:
"Revere Zomar Lens, Electric Eve Camera—Formerly
$149.50—Now Only $119.95."
The remainder of the advertisement can summarize quicklv
the most desirable selling points. Then add the name of a store,
or a coupon, and close.
This is the typical department store, discount store, mailorder-bargain-catalog type of advertising. It takes advantage of
the full weight of all the advertising that has been done on the
same product before it. Its addition—its news—is the price—or
a free gift—or instant delivery—or proximity in the neighborhood. Its prospect is fully aware—he has all the information he
needs. Here the copy writer is nothing more than the merchandise manager's phrase-maker. The price is the most important
part of his headline. There is nothing creative about his job, and
he should receive the lowest possible scale of pav.
2. The Customer Knows of the Product
But Doesn't Yet Want It
Here, your prospect isn't completely aware of all your product does, or isn't convinced of how well it does it, or hasn't yet
been told how much better it does it now.

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

17

Here—in the approach to this market—is the great bulk of
all advertising. Here you are dealing with a product which is
known—which has established a brand name—which has alreadylinked itself with an acknowledged public desire, and has proven
that it satisfied that desire.
Here vour headline is faced with one of seven tasks:
(a) To reinforce your prospects desire for your product:
(b) To sharpen his image of the way vour product satisfies
that desire;
(c) To extend his image of where and when vour product
satisfies that desire;
(d) To introduce new proof, details, documentation of how
well vour product satisfies that desire;
(e) To announce a new mechanism in that product to enable it to satisfy that desire e\-en better;
(f) To announce a new mechanism in vour product that eliminates former limitations;
(g) Or to completely change the image or the mechanism of
that product, in order to remove it from the competition of other
products claiming to satisfy the same desire.
In all seven cases, the approach is the same. You display the
name of the product—either in the headline or in an equally
large logo—and use the remainder of the headline to point out
its superioritv. The body of the ad is then an elaboration of that
superiority—including visualization, documentation, mechanization. When you have finished weaving in everv strand of vour
product's superiority7, your ad is done.
Here are sample headlines presenting solutions to all seven
of the problems of this state of awareness:
(a) To reinforce your prospect's desire for your product—
bv using:
ASSOCIATION:

"Steinway—The Instrument of the Immortals."
"Jov—The Costliest Perfume in the World."

18

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS
EXAMPLE:

"Which Twin Has the Toni?"
"Hair Coloring So Natural Only Her Hairdresser
Knows For Sure—Miss Clairol."
SENSORY SHARPEN I \ 0 :

"Tastes like you just picked it—Dole."
"The skin YOU love to touch—Woodbury"
ILLUSTRATION:

(Anyone of the thousands of superb pictorial ads in the food,
fashion, cosmetic, jewelry and similar industries. Perhaps best
summed up by Life Saver's classic headline. "Please don't lick
this page.")
(b) To sharpen your prospect's image of the way your product
satisfies that desire (Much like the sensory shaipening illustrated
above; but concentrating here on the physical product itself, or on
the mechanism bv which it works):
"At 60 miles an hour, the loudest noise in a Rolls
Royee is the electric clock."
"The amazing story of a Zippo that worked after
being taken from the bellv of a fish."
(c) To extend his image of where and when
satisfies that desire:

your product

"Anywhere you go. Hertz is always nearby"
"Thirst knows no season"—in a winter ad, at a time
when cold drinks were only consumed during the summer—"Coca Cola."
(d) To introduce new proof, details,
11
your product satisfies that desire:
we,

documentation

"9 out of 10 screen stars use Lux Toilet Soap for
their priceless smooth skins."

of how

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

19

"Jake La Motta, 160-lb fighter, fails to flatten Mono
paper cup."
"In Boston, the #1 tea-drinking citv, the #1 tea is
Salada."
(e) To announce a new mechanism in that product to enable
it to satisfy that desire even better:
"Hoovers new invention washes floors and vacuums
up the scrub water."
"Worlds only dog food that makes its own gravy—
Gaines Graw Train."
(f) To announce a new mechanism in i/onr product that eliminates former limitations:
"You breathe no dustv odors when YOU do it with
Lewvt."
"A new Zenith hearing aid—inconspicuous beyond
belief."
(g) Or to completely change the image or the mechanism of
the product, in order to remove it from the competition of other
products claiming to satisfy the same desire.
Here we are dealing with the State of Sophistication of our
market—the amount of exposure they have already had to similar products. Every product during its life history encounters this
problem. All of Chapter 3 will be devoted to some of the approaches to its solution.
We now move on to the less aware markets—with their more
difficult copv challenges, and their greater demand for the unprecedented.
3. How to Introduce N e w Products
The prospect either knows, or recognizes immediately, that
he wants what the product does; but he doesn't yet know' that
there is a product—your product—that will do it for him.

20

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

Here the problem is two-fold. First, to pinpoint the illdefined, as-vet-uncrvstallized desire that is slowly spreading
through great masses of people all over America. And second,
to crystallize that desire, and its solution, so sharplv and so dramatically that each and every prospect will recognize it at a
glance.
The three steps in the process are simple. Name the desire
and/or its solution in vour headline. Prove that that solution can
be accomplished. And show that the mechanism of that accomplishment is contained in vour product.
However, starting with a market in this still-amorphous state
of awareness, and continuing with each of the more difficult challenges to come, the execution becomes more and more important
than the mechanics. Here the eopv writer contributes more and
more to the value of the product in the public eve, and to its
total volume of sales. Here the innovator comes into play. Here
the ratio of salary of copy writer to production supervisor shoots
up abruptly. For this is the domain of the idea man.
What are the attributes he needs 0
First, analysis. As a copy writer vou will find it necessary to
define the particular market most receptive to vour product, its
location in relation to your product in terms of awareness and
sophistication, and the driving emotional forces that have created
both that market and the potential for the sales of vour product
within it.
Second, intuition, which may be described as the ability to
sense a trend at its start, gauge its force and direction, determine the precise moment when it burgeons into a profitable
market.
And third, verbal creativity, as discussed in the next three
chapters, and throughout the rest of the book. The ability to give
a name to the still-undefined. To capture a feeling, a hope, a desire, a fear in words. To create a catchword or a slogan. To focus
emotion, and give it a goal.
Let us see how great writers in the past have taken these

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

21

amorphous desires, and brought them into razor-sharp focus in
a single statement in their headline:
"Light a Lucky, and vou'll never miss sweets that make
you fat."
"Who else wants a whiter wash—with no hard work':""
"How to win friends and influence people.
"To men who want to cjuit work some day.
"When doctors feel rotten—this is what they do.'
"Now! Run your car without spark plugs''
"Who ever heard of 17,000 />/<>om* ironi a single plant 0 "
And dozens more. Here, amorphous desire has been crystallized in the headline. Then sharpened and expanded in the
first few paragraphs; satisfied and documented in the body of the
ad: and focussed inevitably on the product throughout.
Sometimes the simplest statement of the desire is the best.
"How to win friends and influence people" needs no verbal twist
to increase its impact. At other times, the desire itself must be
reinforced by fresh proof that it can be achieved, "When doctors
feel rotten—this is what they do". Or by mystery, "Now! Run
your car without spark plugs!" Or by wonderment, "Who ever
heard of 17,000 blooms from a single plant?". The next two chapters will discuss, first, the strategy of determining when to use a
fresh approach; and second, how- to sharpen that first statement
of desire with verbalization.

4. H o w to Introduce Products That Solve Needs
The prospect has—not a desire—but a need. He recognizes
the need immediately. But he doesn't yet realize the connection
between the fulfillment of that need and your product.
This is the problem-solving ad. It might be thought of as a
special case of the desire ad mentioned above, since the tech-

'Z'Z

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

nique of writing it is so similar. H e r e you start bv naming the
need and/or its solution in your headline. Then dramatize the
need so vividly that the prospect realizes just how badlv he needs
the solution. And then present your product as the inevitable
solution.
Again, this type of ad runs from the most naked statement
of the need alone, to the most complicated verbal twists to bring
it to the peak of impact. To start at the beginning, the most effective possible headline for your particular problem mav be as
simple as this:
"Corns?"
Here, only the problem itself is mentioned—nothing more.
Or it may be necessary to state both problem and solution immediately:
"Stops maddening itch."
Many headlines in this category promise the removal of previously unconquerable limitations. They are especially popular in
catalog selling:
"Lets portable transistor radios play on ordinary household current."
And many combine all three elements—the problem, its solution, and the removal of the usually expected limitations:
"Shrinks hemorrhoids without surgerv."
There are headlines which promise substitutes for unpleasant or expensive tasks:
"Now! A ring and piston job in a tube!"

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

^o

And there are headlines which promise to prevent a future
problem, before it can occur:
"Look, Mom! No cavities!"
But many times the problem is not so clearly defined, not
so obviously on the surface. You may know the general area of
the problem—for example, people's embarrassment at speaking
poor English. But you may not be sure of which avenue is the
most effective in reaching them. Here the emphasis of a single
w o r d—the emotional sharpening of an already easily-identified
image—provides the answer:
"Do YOU make these mistakes in English0"
And, where the solution to the need has been promised
before—where the direct statement of the solution has lost its
force and freshness—then verbal twists are needed to restore that
novelty:
"How a bald-headed barber helped save my hair."

5. How to Open Up a Completely Unaware Market
And finally—the most difficult. The prospect is either not
aware of his desire or his need—or he won't honestly admit it to
himself without being lead into it by your ad—or the need is so
general and amorphous that it resists being summed up in a single
headline—or it's a secret that just can't be verbalized.
This is the outer reach of the awareness scale. These are the
people who are still the logical prospects for your product; and
vet, in their own minds, they are hundreds of miles away from
accepting that product. It is your job to bridge that gap.
Let me repeat what I said when we first began to explore
these five stages of awareness. Each of these stages is separated
from the others by a psychological wall. On one side of that wall
is indifference; on the other, intense interest. A headline that

24
YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

will work wonders in the first stage-for example, "Dial Soap-90
a cake - w i l l fail completely when addressed to a third-stage
market where your prospect doesn't even realize that soaps can
be made with built-in deodorants. And a third-stage headlinefor example "Who else wants a whiter wash with no hard work?"
- w i l l be old-hat, no-news to todays housewife, who has been
barraged by whiter-than-white advertising for twenty years
To sum up, then.- a headline which will work to'a market in
one stage of awareness will not work to a market in another
stage of awareness. Nor will it work, even to a market in which
it has been successful, once that market passes on to a new stage
b
ot awareness.
Most products are designed to satisfy a specific need or
desire. They are born into markets that are m at least the third
or fourth stages of awareness. They may therefore never be faced
with the problem of an unaware market.
However, many products actually pass out of public awareness or out of public acceptance-at some time or other during their hfe histories. The desire they satisfy dries up, or other
products serve it better, or they are branded "old-fashioned "
Again, we are dealing with a matter of statistics. When a
product begins to slip . . . when volume falls off, even though advertising budgets are increased . . . when the name of the product no longer sells as much . . . when a direct statement of the
product s function no longer sells as much . . . when a direct statement of the desire or the need that the product fulfills no longer
sells as much-then that product needs to be reborn, and its problem is the problem of opening up an unatvare market
Again, this is the most difficult, the most challenging probem of a 1. There are few positive milestones to guide vou But
fortunately there are some completely self-evident negative rules
that can eliminate many blind alleys, and set you face to face
against your task. Planning a headline for a completely unaware
or resistant market, then, is first of all a process of elimination'
Here are the first paths:

25
YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

1. Price means nothing to a person who does not know your
product, or want your product. Therefore, eliminate all mention
of price, or price reduction, in your headline or prime display
type.
2. The name of vour product means nothing to a person
who has never seen it'before, and may actually damage your ad
if you have had a bad model the year before, or if it is now associated with the antiquated, the unfashionable, or the unpleasant. Therefore, keep vour product out of the headline, and be
extremely wary about'breaking the mood or disguise of your ad
with a prominent logo.
3. And this is the hardest fact of all to accept. At this stage
of your market, a direct statement of what your product does,
what desire it satisfies, or what problem it sokes, simply will not
work. Your product either has not reached that direct stage, or
has passed beyond it. And vou cannot simply shift from one desire to another. You are not faced here with a problem of sophistication, but one of complete indifference, or unacceptability. Therefore, the performance of vour product, and the desire
it'satisfies, can only be brought in later. You cannot mention them
in vour headline.
' So vou cannot mention price, product, function or desire.
What do vou have left? Your market, of course! And the distinct
possibility that by broadening vour appeal beyond price, product
function or specific desire, vou can reach the maximum limits of
your full potential market; consolidate splinter appeals; and increase the sales of vour product at a fantastic rate.
Once you have accepted the challenge of writing this kind
of ad, then vour product and its attributes fade into the background, and'you concentrate exclusively on the state of mind of
vour market at this particular moment.
'
What vou are doing essentially in this fifth stage is calling
uour market together in the headline of your ad. You are writing an identification headline. You are selling nothing, promising
nothing, satisfying nothing. Instead, you are echoing an emotion,

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

an attitude, a ^satisfaction that picks people out from the crowd
and binds them together in a single statement.
In this type of headline, you are telling them what thev are
You are defining them for themselves. You are giving them the
information they need and want, about a problem still so vague
that you are the first to put it into words.
Here, above all, is the type of headline that never attempts
to sell a product or a performance, but simplv tries to sell the
remainder of the ad itself—the information that follows on the
page. The only function of this headline is to get the prospect to
read the next paragraph. And this second paragraph pulls him
into the third; and the third into the fourth: and right on down
the page, paragraph after paragraph.
Meanwhile these paragraphs are building a steady progression of logical images, from the first identification with'the headline, to a growing awareness of the problem or the desire to
the realization that a solution is at hand, and to the inevitable
focussing of that desire and that solution onto your particular
product.
This, then, is the general strategy of dealing with an unaware
market. The application of this strategy, when all direct methods
have failed, has produced hundreds of great headlines. It would
be impossible to classify all of them, since each solution establishes its own new pattern. However, there are definite landmarks
and directions we can distinguish. Here are some of them—starting with the general principle they used, then the problem thev
solved, then the headline itself, and then the most important
structural paragraph of body copy:

Giving Words to a Hidden Dream
Problem: to expand the market for home correspondence
courses beyond that obtained by "Earn more money" and "Gain
more skill" headlines. The solution:

27

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

THE UNIVERSITY OF THE NIGHT
The voung Lincoln, poring over borrowed school-books
far into the night—seeking in the dim light of bis log fire
the transforming light of knowledge—eager to grow—eager
to do . . . here is an example which has inspired the man
who strives against the odds of circumstances to make his
place in the world.
To-night, in cities and towns and villages . . . thousands
of men will drop their daily labors to fight, beneath the
lamp, the battle that Lincoln fought. . .
Up from the mines, down from the masts of ships . . .
from all the places where men work, they will go home
and take up their books because they yearn to grow, because thev seek higher training, greater skill, more responsibility . . .
Some of them are men who work in one field whereas
their talents and desires are in another. Some . . . are halted
in their progress because they do not understand the higher
principles of their business or profession. Some left school
in bovhood because poverty made it necessary . . .
Fifty years ago these men . . . would have had no place
to turn for the courses of study and for the personal guidance that they need.
Thirty vears ago there was founded a school to help
them—a school created for their needs and circumstances—
a school that goes to them no matter where they are—a
school. . .
Created in response to a need, the International Correspondence Schools have developed their scope and usefulness to the growth of that need . . .

Exploiting a Hidden Fear
Problem: To re-vitalize the sales of a coffee substitute, long
after health headlines and pep headlines and taste headlines had
failed. Secondary problem: To overcome a slipping brand name,
that was no longer an asset in either the headline or the logo.
The solution:

28

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

WHY MEN CRACK.. .
An authority of international standing recently wrote;
"You have overeaten and plugged vour organs with moderate stimulants, the worst of which are not onlv alcohol
and tobacco, but caffeine and sugar . . . "
You know them. Strong men. vigorous men, robust
men—men who have never had a sick dav in their lives.
They drive. They drive themselves to the limit. They lash
themselves over the limit with stimulants. Thev crack. Often,
the\- crash.
You have seen them afterwards. Pitiful shells. The zest
gone, the fire gone. Burnt-out furnaces of energy.
"He was such a healthy-looking man "
He was. His health was his undoing. His constitution
absorbed punishment. Otherwise he might have been
warned in time.
"For every action there is an equal and contrary reaction." You learned the law in physics. It applies to bodies.
For every ounce of energy gained bv stimulation, bv
whipping the nerves to action, an ounce of reserve strength
is drained . . . But repeated withdrawals exhaust anv reserve.
Physical bankruptcy. Then the crash . . .
It's time to get back to normal, to close the drafts, to
bank some of the fires...
Avoid stimulants. What is good for the bov is good for
the man . . .
Borrowed Energy Must Be Repaid!
Two million American families avoid caffeine bv drinking Postum. And two million American families are better
off for it. . .

Leading Into an Unacceptable Problem by Starting
With a Universally Accepted Image
Problem: To gain both publisher and prospect acceptance
for a woman's deodorant. A direct statement of the performance
or product would not only offend, but would never be published.
The solution:

YOUR PROSPECT S STATE OF AWARENESS

29

WITHIN THE CURVE OF A WOMAN'S ARM
A frank discussion of a subject too often avoided.
A woman's arm! Poets have sung of its grace: artists
have painted its beautv.
It should be the daintiest, sweetest thing in the world.
And vet, unfortunatelv. it isn't, alwavs.
There's an old offender in this quest for perfect daintiness—an offender of which we ourselves niav be ever so
unconscious, but which is just as truly present.
Shall we discuss it frankly?
Many a woman who savs, "No, I am never annoved
by perspiration," does not know the facts . . .
Of course, we aren't to blame because nature has made
us so that the perspiration glands under the arms are more
active than anywhere else. Nor are we to blame because . . .
have made normal evaporation there impossible.
Would you be absolutely sure of your daintiness?
It is the chemicals of the body, not uncleanliness, that
cause odor. And even though there is no active perspiration—no apparent moisture—there may be under the arms
an o d o r . . .
Fastidious women who want to be absolutely sure of
their daintiness have found that thev could not trust to
their own consciousness; they have felt the need of a toilet water which would insure them against any of this kind
of underarm unpleasantness, either moisture or odor.
To meet this need, a physician formulated Odorono—
a perfectly harmless and delightful toilet water . . .

To Project a Hidden Desire Which
Cannot Be Put Bluntly Into Words
Problem: To capitalize on research findings that smoking cigarettes gives men a feeling of virilitv, importance, sexual strength.
Any verbal expression of these themes, however, would be instantly rejected as absurd and offensive. The solution:
The MARLBORO TATTOO AD: With its virile men (cowboys, racing car drivers, sky divers, etc.) whose appearance alone

30

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

projected more of an image of raw virility than any number of
words could ever convev.
Using a C o m m o n Resentment or Unvoiced Protest
to Capture a Far Greater Market Than the Direct
Statement of the Solution of That Resentment
Would Produce
Problem: To sell a do-it-yourself book on television repairs.
Although all owners of TV sets were the potential market, only
a small fraction considered themselves interested enough or capable enough to respond to a direct promise headline: "Save up
to $100 a year on your TV repairs!" Most were afraid thev could
not make the repairs themselves. Therefore, the market must
be broadened to include the nonhandvmen owners, bv exploiting the existing resentment against TV s e n i c e contracts. The
solution:
WHY HAVEN'T TV OWNERS BEEN TOLD
THESE FACTS
Was your set purchased after the spring of 1947? Then
here is the full, uncensored storv of how- von can avoid
those $15-$20 repair bills—avoid those $30-860 a vear service fees—and still get the perfect, movie-clear pictures
you've dreamed about!
How many times this week have you had to get up to
fix a jumpy TV picture? . . . How many times have you had
to put up with ghosts? . . .
90% of These Breakdowns Are Unnecessary!
All these breakdowns mav have seemed tragic to vou
at the moment they happened—but here is the real tragedy! Do you know that the same exact set that vou now
have in your front room . . . has been playing in manufacturer's test rooms for months—and playing perfectly!
These sets have been subjected to "Breakdown
Tests" . . . These sets have been tested against every conceivable type of viewing hazard . . . And, in almost everyone of these cases, these sets have produced perfect, movie-

YOUR PROSPECT S STATE OF AWARENESS

clear pictures, without major breakdowns, for as much as
one full vear! Here are some of the reasons why:
What TV Experts Have Learned About Your Set.
If your set were properly cared for, as these sets
were . . . it need break down only once during the entire
year . . .
If your set were properly cared for, it can actually give
you perfect, movie-clear reception the other 364 days of
the year . . .
And most important, these experts have discovered
that you do not have to be a handyman or a mechanic in
order to coax this performance . . . Here's why:
5 Minutes a Week for Perfect Reception.
These TV experts have discovered that your TV set is
a great deal like your bod}' in this respect—that it gives
warning signals before it has a major breakdown . . .
Now, if you had the knowledge to make a few minor
adjustments, on the outside controls of that set, then you
could correct those symptoms . . .
If you do not have this knowledge . . . then your set
will weaken, you will have a constantly bad picture . . .
It's as simple as that. You pay a repairman—not for
his work—but for his knowledge. If you had that knowledge yourself—then you would not have to pav him at
all . . .'
Now suppose that you had a TV expert at your elbow
24 hours a day. Suppose that every time your set began to
flicker, or jump . . . this expert would show you exactly what
knob on the outside of vour set vou could turn . . .
Suppose that every time you were annoyed bv
ghosts . . . this expert would show you a simple nonmechanical trick . . .
Yes, and suppose that even when your set went black,
this expert could show you . . .
All the Information You Need About Your TV Set!
This is exactly what a new book, the TELEVISION
OWNER'S GUIDE does for you . . .

32

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

Projecting an Ultimate Triumph That
the Prospect Will Identify With
Problem: To sell music lessons by correspondence to a greater
audience than would respond to a direct "Plav Real Tunes on the
Piano in Five Davs" approach. The solution:
THEY LAUGHED WHEN I
SAT DOWN AT THE PIANO.
BUT WHEN I STARTED TO PLAY!—
Arthur had just played "The Rosarv." The room rang
with applause. I decided that this would he a dramatic moment for me to make my debut. To the amazement of all
my friends, I strode confidently over to the piano and sat
down.
"Jack is up to his old tricks," somebody chuckled. The
crowd laughed . . .
"Can he really play?" I heard a girl whisper to Arthur.
"Heavens, no!" Arthur exclaimed. "He never plaved a
note in his life. But you just watch him. This is going to
be good." . . .
Then I Started to Play.
Instantly a tense silence fell on the guests. The laughter died on their lips as if by magic . . . I heard gasps of
amazement. My friends sat breathless—spellbound.
I played on and on and as I plaved I forgot the people
around me. I forgot the hour, the place, the breathless listeners. The little world I lived in seemed to fade—seemed
to grow dim—unreal. Only the music was real . . . It seemed
as if the master musician himself were speaking to me . . .
not in words but in chords. Not in sentences but in exquisite melodies!
A Complete Triumph!
As the last notes of the Moonlight Sonata died awav,
the room resounded with a sudden roar of applause. I found
myself surrounded by excited faces. How mv friends
carried on! Men shook me by the hand—wildly congratulated me—pounded me on the back with their enthusiasm!
Everybody was exclaiming with delight—plving me with

YOUR P R O S P E C T ' S STATE OF AWARENESS

33

rapid questions . . . "Jack! Why didn't you tell us you could
play like that?" . . . "Where did you learn?" . . . "How long
have you studied?" . . . "Who was your teacher?"
"I have never even seen my teacher," I replied. "And
just a short while ago I couldn't even play a note."
"Quit vour kidding," laughed Arthur, himself an accomplished pianist. "You've been studying for years. I can tell."
"I have been studying only a short while," I insisted.
"I decided to keep it a secret 'so I could surprise all you
folks."
Then I told them the whole story
"Have vou ever heard of the U.S. School of Music?"
T 'ISKPQ

A few of my friends nodded. "That's a correspondence
school, isn't it'3" thev exclaimed.
"Exactly," I replied. "They have a new simplified
method that can teach you to play any instrument by mail
in just a few short months." . . .
Projecting the Result of a Problem in Such a Way That It
Will Be Identified With by People Who Would Reject a
Direct Statement of the Problem Itself
Problem: To increase the sales of a mouthwash, not only on
a germ theme (which could be immediately accepted), but on
the more universal social-offense theme, which would be rejected
in its direct form. The idea of bad breath was too insulting to be
taken by the public "straight." The solution:
OFTEN A BRIDESMAID BUT NEVER A BRIDE
Edna's case was really a pathetic one. Like every
woman, her primary ambition was to marry. Most of the
girls in her set were married—or about to be. Yet no one
possessed more charm or grace or loveliness than she.
And as her birthdays crept gradually toward that tragic
thirtv-mark, marriage seemed farther from her life than
ever.
She was often a bridesmaid but never a bride.

34

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE O F AWARENESS

That's the insidious thing about halitosis (unpleasant
breath). You, yourself rarely know when vou have it. And
even your closest friends won't tell vou.
Sometimes, of course, halitosis comes from some deepseated organic disorder that requires professional advice.
But usually—and fortunately—halitosis is onlv a local condition that yields to the regular use of Listerine as a mouth
wash and gargle. It is an interesting thing that this wellknown antiseptic that has been in use for \ ears for surgical dressings, possesses these unusual properties as a breath
deodorant...
Projecting the Result of an Accomplishment to Attract
People Who Would Be Frightened Away by the Work
Implied to Achieve It
Problem: To broaden the market for home correspondence
courses, beyond that possible with a direct statement of the immediate result—learning or skill. An attempt must be made to
direct the prospect's mind away from effort, to reward. The solution:
"HERE'S AN EXTRA $50, GRACE—"
'7'm making real money now!"
"Yes, I've been keeping it a secret until pav day came.
I've been promoted with an increase of $50 a month. And
the first extra money is yours. Just a little reward for urging me to study at home. The boss saws mv spare time
training has made me a valuable man to the firm and there's
more money coming soon. We're starting up easv street,
Grace, thanks to vou and the I.C.S. . . ."
The List Never Ends
Every day new solutions, new patterns are being created.
Wherever the direct appeal fails, or loses its power, you should
begin to explore a fifth stage headline.
However, there are two vital points to remember in connection with this problem. First of all, this type of headline is in-

YOUR PROS

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

35

finitely more difficult to bring home to the target than any of the
other four types. You are far more likely to miss the mark on this
headline, because you have far fewer guideposts to direct you.
Your headline no longer refers to i/our product, but it must therefore refer even more strongly to your market. It cannot simply
be a startler, or an attention-getter, or humorous, or cute. Nor
can it mask the fact that it has no headline behind a prettv picture. Most copy writers use a fifth stage problem to write an
empty headline, and are therefore simply wasting their client's
money.
Because it is so easy to wander off into an irrelevant headline, keep this one cardinal rule in mind. Your prospect must
identify with your headline before lie can buy from it. It must
be his headline, his problem, his state of mind at that particular
moment. It must pick out the product's logical prospects—and
reject as many people as it attracts.
And, if it is an effective headline, and it works, then it too
will become outdated as your market moves on to a new stage
of awareness. And you will be presented with another problem,
just as challenging, and just as rewarding, as the one you have
solved before. You never step in the same river twice. No market ever stands still.
A Final Word on Style in Advertising Copy
Markets change; desires change; fashions change. And so do
the acceptable styles of advertisements change. Certain advertising styles—the form your advertising message takes—grow tired
with time—then stale—then actually laughable. At the turn of
the century, effective ads were written in verse; twenty years later,
no one would believe them. In the 1920s most of the great ads
were narrative stories—either first-person confessions, or third
person revelations, or comic strips dramatizations. Today everything but the comic strip is gone—and we see less and less of it
every year. When a new style is born, people believe it, and it

36

YOUR PROSPECT'S STATE OF AWARENESS

reinforces the message it is carrying. When that same style grows
trite, people cannot see the message for the advertisement.
We'll explore this subject further, in the chapters discussing
Mood and Disguise in writing advertisements. Meanwhile, one
more note here.
In effective advertising, though stvles may change, strategydoes not. If you will study the piano and bridesmaid ads in this
chapter, you will notice this: That while the narrative style of
both is now old-hat, you can still respond to their power. Both
tap desires that still exist—though now perhaps directed toward
different products and different problems. And both evoke those
desires, and channel those desires, so effectively, that if they
were rewritten in today's idiom, and applied to different products, they still might sell millions of dollars worth of goods today.

THE SOPHISTICATION OF
YOUR MARKET:
HOW MANY PRODUCTS
HAVE B E E N THERE
BEFORE YOU?

As we mentioned before, in Chapter 2, there are three questions vou must answer before vou can
determine what goes into vour headline. These are:
1. What is the mass desire that motivates your market?
2. How much does your market know about your product?
(Their State of Awareness.)
3. How many similar products have they been told about before? (Their State of Sophistication.)
This third question is the most easilv answered. A few hours
research should give you samples of everv competing ad in the
field—if there are any.
If You Are First in Your Market
If there are not—if vou are the first in your particular market,
with your particular product—then you are dealing with prospects
37

•JO

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

that have no sophistication about your product at all. In other
words, thev have never received any information about such a
product before. Once you get them interested, they are likelv to
become much more enthusiastic, believe much more of what you
have to say, and buy that much more readily. Remember, vour
story is brand-new to them.
This, of course, is the dream of every manufacturer and every
copy writer. To be first. And it happens quite often today. Sometimes because of a technological breakthrough—creating a new
product (women's hair sprays), or a radically better product (longplaying records), or a familiar product at an explosively low price
(the Model T Ford).
And sometimes, such a brand-new market is created by the
insight of an advertising man, dealing with an already-established
product. In this case, the ad man visualizes the application of the
product to an entirely different market (the switch, in the Twenties, of Ovaltine from an aid for insomnia to a body builder for
skinnv children).
Or he reaches that market through a hitherto untapped
medium (Revlons fabulous results from sponsorship of "The
$64,000 Question" in the early days of TV).
Or he discovers a previously unnoticed performance of his
product that carries it completely beyond the limits of its old
market (Lifebuoy's discovery that people would accept its strong
medicinal odor as a cure for perspiration odor, and their subsequent christening of that odor with the catch-word "B.O.").
When such a golden opportunity—to be first—presents itself, you are probably dealing with a market in its third or fourth
stage of awareness. Your prospects know that they would like
what your product does, or they would like to get rid of the problem your product solves—if it were only possible.
Here, the answer to your third question is quite simple. You
are dealing with a market where you are first. Therefore thev
have no previous information about similar products. Therefore
they are completely unsophisticated.

39

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

And vour exploitation of this answer—your strategy in approaching this market—is equally simple:
1. Be simple. Be direct. Above all, don't be fancy. 'Same either the need or the claim in your headline—nothing more. Dramatize that claim in your copy—make it as powerful as possible.
And. then bring in your product; and prove that it works.
Nothing more—because nothing more is needed. To illustrate, let's look at one of the most profitable, insatiable, constantlyrenewing, and therefore overworked fields in marketing history:
the reducing field. No one knows who was the first man to stumble on the reducing field (though it's fairly certain that he must
have become a millionaire). But all he had to say in his headline
as a simple statement of the direct desire of millions of women:
w:

"NOW! LOSE UGLY FAT!"
As he started to clean up, others inevitably followed. But, by
this time, the reducing field had already been tapped. Advertisements had been run. The direct claim had been made. Mere repetition would no longer be enough. In other words, the reducing
market was now in its Second Stage of Sophistication. A new approach was necessary. The strategy had to be changed—to this:

If You're Second, Do This
If you're second, and the direct claim is still working—then
copy that successful claim—but enlarge on it. Drive it to the absolute limit. Outbid your competition.
For example, here are two successful headlines in the now
fiercelv-competitive reducing field that did just that. They have
both been pushed to the outer limits of both legality and believabilitv. But thev both worked.
'LOSE UP TO 47 POUNDS IN 4 WEEKSOR RECEIVE $40 BACK!"

40

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER
. . . NEVER A HUNGRY MINUTE."
In most fields, this enlarged-claim technique reaches the
outer limits in successive stages. Sometimes the completion of
this process takes years. In the home garden field, as another example, an advertiser brought out a Floribunda Rose—using this
headline with startling success:
"PICK 25—50—100 ROSES
FROM THIS ONE MAGNIFICENT PLANT!"
It worked. And so, some years later, a special variety of cushion mum swept the country with this headline:
"SIX HUNDRED MUMS
FROM A SINGLE BUSH!"
And, one year later, this headline carried the process to what
are probably the absolute limits of Mother Nature:
"WHO EVER HEARD OF
17,000 BLOOMS
FROM A SINGLE PLANT?"
As simple as this evolution looks, it produces results. It provided a tremendous lift to car sales in the 1950s, when 50 more
horsepower was added to the advertisements everv vear. It was
climaxed in the Chrysler 300—a car named after its horsepower
rating—and pegged just at the limit of believability, practicality,
and the inevitable public reaction.
For the reaction will come. Toward the end, the process
disintegrates. The successful claim is overworked; enlargement
piles on enlargement. New competitors enter the field—each trying to promise more. Headlines double and triple in size. Words
begin to lose their meaning—"whiter-than-whites" appear. The
prospect becomes confused—then skeptical. Believability is shattered; claims are automatically discounted 50% by their
readers. More promise is poured in to compensate. The govern-

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

41

merit begins to investigate. And the sales curve begins to turn
down-down-down.
The Third Stage of Sophistication
At this point, your market has entered into its Third Stage
of Sophistication. Your prospects have now heard all the claims—
all the extremes. Perhaps they have even bought one or two competitive products. Every time they open a newspaper, another
similar headline screams out at them. How are they to distinguish one product from the mass? How do you break through to
reach them?
One factor is vital here. That is the restorative power of the
market you are dealing with. It may be a market based on a constantly recurring mass instinct, such as reducing. It may be a market based on an unsolved technological problem, such as spark
plug replacement. It may be a market that periodically wishes to
renew or improve its purchases, such as cars, homes, appliances.
In all these cases, the desire never fades; the market continuallv renews itself. New prospects come into the market. Old
customers become dissatisfied with their old purchases, their old
solutions, and begin to look again. The mass desire—the tremendous profit potential—still exists. But it cannot be tapped by the
old, simple methods any longer.
Women still want to lose weight. But by now they've read
dozens of ads for reducing aids—all promising them to take off
20, 30, 40 pounds in a matter of weeks. They no longer fully believe them. Perhaps the}' believe these ads so little that they won't
even try a new product at all. For months, even years, they may
simplv accept their overweight condition as "something that just
can't be helped."
But the desire never fades. The dissatisfaction builds up,
month after month. Secretly, perhaps even unconsciously, these
women are hoping to find a new product—a new headline—that
promises them a new way to satisfy that age-old desire.

42

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

And on this fundamental fact, we build our strategy for selling a market in its Third Stage of Sophistication.
If your market is at the stage where they've heard all the
claims, in all their extremes, then mere repetition or exaggeration
wont work any longer. What this market needs now is a new device to make all these old claims become fresh and believable to
them again. In other words, A NEW MECHANISM—a new way
to making the old promise work. A different process—a fresh
chance—a brand-new possibility of success where only disappointment has resulted before.
Here the emphasis shifts from what the product does to
HOW it works. Not accomplishment, but performance becomes
dominant. The headline expands. The claim remains—but now
it is reinforced by the mechanism that accomplishes it. In the reducing field, for example, the limits of its basic promise had been
reached bv headlines like this:
"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER
. . . NEVER A HUNGRY MINUTE."
Now new leaders emerge—avoiding the competition of
claims—stressing mechanism instead, like this:
"FLOATS FAT RIGHT OUT
OF YOUR BODY!"
ft ft ft

"FIRST WONDER DRUG
FOR REDUCING!"
A vital change has taken place in both these ads—and in
every ad that deals successfully with this Third Stage of Sophistication. In the previous, Second-Stage ads, the entire headline
was taken up by a complete statement of the main claim. Below
it, in smaller type, in either a subhead or the bodv copy, came
the mechanism that accomplished the claim. Often, this mechanism was abbreviated—simply mentioned instead of being explained—indicated bv a sort of shorthand, like this:

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

43

"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER
. . . NEVER A HUNGRY MINUTE.'
Read the Astonishing Experience of New York Food
Expert with the Famous Eat-and-Redtice Plan.
In Third-Stage ads, however, this arrangement is completely
reversed. By this time, the basic claim has become well-known
to almost all its prospects—perhaps even too well-known. Therefore, this shorthand can be applied to the claim itself. What was
before a five to ten word headline describing nothing but the
basic claim—"I AM 61 P O U N D S LIGHTER"—Hint- can he communicated in a single word in a headline devoted to explaining
how this claim is accomplished. For instance:
"FLOATS FAT RIGHT
OUT OF YOUR BODY!"
Or:
"FIRST WONDER DRUG
FOR REDUCING!"
First the mechanism is brought into the headline to establish
a point of difference—to make the old claims fresh and believable
again. And then—once the prospect is told that here is a brandnew chance for success—then the claim can he restated in full, to
make sure that she realizes everything she is getting. Like this:
"FLOATS FAT RIGHT
OUT OF YOUR BODY!"
Released for the first time! The amazing scientific discoverv that melts up to 37 POUNDS off men and women—
without starvation diets, without a single hungry moment—
without even giving up the foods you love!
Or—using the same Third-Stage arrangement of mechanism
in the headline, and claim elaborated in the lead paragraph—we
have this ad:

44

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

"FIRST WONDER DRUG
FOR REDUCING!"
Used successfully by thousands of phvsicians! Lose as
many pounds as you like without diets, without exercise,
without giving up the kinds of food vou love to eat!
In both these ads—and all others like them—the promise itself is subordinated to the mechanism which accomplishes that
promise. This mechanism is featured in the headline. When ads
such as these are successful, you are dealing with a market that
is in its Third Stage of Sophistication.
The Fourth Stage
But you are still in a competitive market, and such ads give
only a temporary advantage. Such ads, presenting a new promise,
begin a new trend. Within a few months, the Third Stage of Sophistication passes into a Fourth Stage—a new stage of elaboration and enlargement. But this time, the elaboration is concentrated on the mechanism, rather than on the promise—like this:
"FIRST NO-DIET REDUCING
WONDER DRUG!"
This Fourth Stage strategy can be summarized like this:
If a competitor has just introduced a new mechanism to
achieve the same claim as that performed by your product, and
that new-mechanism announcement is producing sales, then you
counter in this way. Simply elaborate or enlarge upon the successful mechanism. Make it easier, quicker, surer; allow it to solve
more of the problem; overcome old limitations; promise extra benefits. You are beginning a stage of embellishment similar to the
Second Stage of Sophistication described above. The same strategy will be effective here.
But, unfortunately, so will the same limitations. The Fourth

T H E SOPHISTICATION O F YOUR MARKET

45

Stage of Sophistication, like the Second Stage which it resembles, eventually pushes itself out of the realm of believabilitv. At
this point, further elaborations become ineffective. You are then
faced with two alternatives:
First, discovering a new, acceptable mechanism to make the
promise fresh and believable again. But remember, the mechanism vou use must not only be new and legitimate, but it must
be accepted as believable and significant by vour market. Each
Third and Fourth Stage ad that precedes you, makes this problem of acceptance more and more difficult.
Eventually, of course, no new mechanism will gain acceptance. The market will have grown tired of your promises and
the mechanisms bv which thev are accomplished. Your prospects
will have been glutted bv advertising. You will have reached the
Fifth Stage of Sophistication—the most difficult—where the field
is said to be exhausted—where competitors are dropping out of
the market en masse.
How to Revive a "Dead" Product
In this Final Stage of Sophistication, your market no longer
believes in your advertising, and therefore no longer wishes to he
aware of your product. In many ways, therefore, this Fifth Stage
of Sophistication corresponds to the Fifth Stage of Awareness discussed in Chapter 2. The problems are the same. The strategy is
the same. The emphasis shifts from the promise and the mechanism which accomplishes it, to identification with the prospect
himself. You are dealing here with the problem of bringing your
prospect into your ad—not through desire—but through identification. (See Chapter 8.)
An outstanding example of a product which had lost its market because of such a Fifth Stage of Sophistication, and then
gained it back by a brilliant use of the identification headline, is
the Postum ad discussed in Chapter 2, and its headline, "WHY
MEN CRACK . . ."

46

T H E SOPHISTICATION O F YOUR MARKET

THE

SOI'HI

Let's Look at an Industry That Went Through
All Five Stages of Sophistication
But perhaps the classic example of an industry which encountered all five Stages of Sophistication—and overcame them—
is the Cigarette Industry. The history of cigarette advertising is
a continuous battle against competition, against physical and social taboos, even against the very success of its own current advertising; which saturates and exhausts the market bv the weight
of its combined industry expenditures, and constantly demands
new approaches.
Let's briefly examine the main current of cigarette advertising first—the progression from the first to the fifth Stages of
Sophistication—and then discuss some of the side problems it
encountered.
In the First Stage of Sophistication, when the market was
new, cigarette advertising featured taste, enjoyment, pleasure in
the headline:
"I'D WALK A MILE FOR A CAMEL!"
"CHESTERFIELD—THEY SATISFY!"
This raw promise of enjoyment gradually became elaborated
and embellished to push it to the limits of believabilitv. In this
Second Stage, since you cannot measure the pleasure a cigarette
gives you, the promise-growth took the form of broader and
broader comparisons:
"LIGHT UP A LUCKY, AND YOU WONT MISS
THE SWEETS THAT MAKE YOU FAT!"
But, without measurement, the limits of enlargement are
soon reached. So Third-Stage strategy began to be emploved—a
continuous stream of brilliant new mechanisms:
"LUCKIES—THEY'RE TOASTED!"

and hciiai:

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

4I

"PALL MALL'S GREATER LENGTH FILTERS
THE SMOKE FURTHER!"
"CAMELS—PROTECT YOUR T-ZONE!"
And, as each of these mechanisms was accepted bv the buying public, the originators competitors adopted the mechanism
and began to elaborate on it—initiating the Fourth Stage:
"PHILIP MORRIS—ALL THE HARSHNESS BAKED OUT!"
"CHESTERFIELD—REGULAR AND KING-SIZED
TOO!"
"NINE OUT OF TEN DOCTORS PREFER
LUCKIES!"
But eventually the mechanisms lost their potency, and the
government ruled out the health claims; and in the early Fifties
the industry faced a Fifth Stage market. But a new marketing
tool—Motivation Research—had shown them how to reach this
market without mechanisms or claims, without even headlines,
simply by projecting strong visual identifications with the virility
that the public had accepted in a cigarette. For example, anv of
the Marlboro "Virile Men" ads. Or their imitations in Chesterfield, or Camel ads.
Thus we have the full spectrum of sophistication confronting
an industry. But cigarette advertisers also encountered two critical side problems. The first offered them the opportunity of doubling their market. The second, of retaining that huge market in
the face of the most adverse publicity
The first challenge occurred immediately following the First
World War. By this time the old "Coffin Nails" taboo had been
forgotten—for men. But there still remained the equally great potential market of women smokers—if smoking could be made respectable for women. The trend was definitely in that direction—
the urge, the curiosity existed in millions of women in all social

48

T H E SOPHISTICATION O F YOUR MARKET

classes—.some respectable women were actually daring to smoke
in public.
But the trend—left by itself—would take years to develop. An
advertisement had to be created to accelerate that trend. To make
smoking for women not only acceptable, but desirable. To channel
the vast movement toward liberation and equality of the Twenties
as the driving force to open up this huge new market.
But such an advertisement could never come right out and
suggest that women smoke. It could not even show a woman
smoking. Such an advertisement was definitely a Fifth Stage problem—a problem in identification. And it was solved by linking a
man and woman in their most appealing connection—in love
with a smoking situation. The ad showed a young couple, sitting
together on a beach on a moonlit night. He is just lighting up
a cigarette—the first puffs of smoke are just drifting into the
moonlight. She has her face turned toward his, and her words
make up the entire headline (and, except for the logo, the entire ad):
"BLOW SOME MY WAV."
Nothing more needed to be said. A vast new market—opened
up with four words.
The second challenge occurred thirty vears later. This
was
the cancer scare of the late Fifties, which continues into today
It resulted in four reactions: First, there were cigarette holders,
water pipes, ceramic filters, etc.—none of which succeeded in establishing a national market, since they represented too much
inconvenience, too blatant an admission that the purchaser was
worried about his smoking.
Secondly, the scare produced a determined effort in the industry itself to conduct its own research, to counteract or correct such claims.
Third, it produced a temporary drop in cigarette sales.
And, fourth, it opened up a vast new market for an already

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

49

existing product—the filter cigarette—aided by the industry itself, which wisely gambled that smokers would not move out of
cigarettes, but simply into a different kind of cigarette.
Filter cigarettes had always existed, as a small, specialty market. But now they were expanded into a mass market. Millions
of new prospects, who had never before even considered filter
cigarettes, now sought out information about them, asked to be
told which one to b u y A new market opened up. And it started
to retrace the same Stages of Sophistication as its parent market
had passed through fifty years before:
First Stage:
"KENT'S MICRONITE FILTER TRAPS TARS BEFORE THEY REACH YOUR LIPS'"
Second Stage:
"20,000 FILTER TRAPS IN VICEROY!"
Third Stage:
"PARLIAMENT—THE MOST IMPORTANT V* INCH
IN SMOKING TODAY—NO FILTER FEEDBACK!"
Fourth Stage:
"TAREYTON—DUAL FILTER FOR DOUBLE THE
PLEASURE!"
And the Fifth Stage—in an industry-wide stroke of genius—
right back to the flavor again:
"WINSTON TASTES GOOD LIKE A CIGARETTE
SHOULD!"
"IT'S WHAT'S UP FRONT THAT COUNTS!"
"L & M HAS FOUND THE SECRET THAT UNLOCKS THE FLAVOR!"

50

T H E SOPHISTICATION OF YOUR MARKET

And so it goes. In industry after industry. The same life cycle
for each market. The same deadly challenges. The same willingness to adapt rather than perish.

A Personal Note
In this book I have tried to write a scientific study of advertising, without troubling the reader with whatever personal
ethics I myself may observe. Every copv writer who has ever
sweated for days to create a new approach will know how it
feels to see that approach copied overnight bv a competitor. I
share every ounce of that feeling. But such events happen every
day. And they are effective. Therefore, examples such as those
detailed above must be listed, in all objectivitv, as a business
strategy that has and will solve competitive problems in a competitive industry. I include them here—not as recommendations,
but as possible strategies to be chosen or rejected.

4
38 WAYS TO STRENGTHEN
YOUR HEADLINE
ONCE YOU HAVE YOUR
BASIC IDEA

Up to this point, we have been
concerned with the strategy of planning copv—of arriving at the
theme of our ad and the content of its headline—rather than
with the techniques of actually writing this copy. The entire second portion of the book will be devoted to these techniques.
But we must pause now, and examine one of these techniques
out of sequence. It is called VERBALIZATION. And it is the
art of increasing the impact of a headline bi/ the way in which
it is stated.
Everything we have done so far lias helped us obtain the
content of our headline. We now know what we want to say. And
we now have to determine how to sav it.
The most obvious wav, of course, is simplv to state the claim
in its barest form. "Lose Weight," or "Stop Corns." for example.
And if you are the first in vour field, there is no better wav.
But where vou are competitive, or where the thought is too
51

52

38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H E N YOUR H E A D L I N E

complicated to be stated simply and directly, then you must reinforce that claim by binding other images to it with the words
in which you express it. This is Verbalization. And it can accomplish several different purposes:
1. It can strengthen the claim—bv enlarging upon it, by measuring it, by making it more vivid, etc.
2. It can make the claim new and fresh again—bv twisting
it, changing it, presenting it from a different angle, turning it into
a narration, challenging the reader with an example, etc.
3. It can help the claim pull the prospect into the body of
the ad—by promising him information about it, bv questioning
him, by partially revealing mechanism, etc.
All of these goals are accomplished by adding variations, enlargements or embellishments to the main headline claim of the
ad. These additional images are bound into the main claim bv
the sentence structure of the headline. Thev alter the main claim
to make it more effective.
They are the second creative step in writing the ad. First,
we have seen how to determine the appeal itself. And now, howto shape that appeal into its most effective form in the headline.
There are, of course, an infinite number of these variations
(every good copywriter invents a few himself). But there are general patterns that most of them follow. Here are some of these
guideposts for vour own thinking:
1. Measure the size of the claim:
"20,000 FILTER TRAPS IN VICEROY!"
"I AM 61 POUNDS LIGHTER . . ."
'WHO EVER HEARD
FROM A SINGLE PLANT?"

OF

2. Measure the speed of the claim:
"FEEL BETTER FAST!"

17,000 BLOOMS

3 8 WAYS T O S T R E N G T H E N YOUR H E A D L I N E

53

"7A7 TWO SECONDS, BAYER ASPIRIN BEGINS
TO DISSOLVE IN YOUR GLASS!'"
3. Compare the claim:
"SIX TIMES WHITER WASHES!"
"COSTS UP TO $300 LESS THAN MANY MODELS OF THE LOW-PRICED THREE!"
4. Metaphorize the claim:
"BANISHES CORNS!"
"MELTS AWAY UGLY FAT!"
5. Sensitize the claim bv making the prospect feel, smell,
touch, see or hear it:
"TASTES LIKE YOU JUST PICKED IT!"
"THE SKIN YOU LOVE TO TOUCH!"
6. Demonstrate the claim bv showing a prime example:
"JAKE LAMOTTA, 160 POUND FIGHTER, FAILS
TO FLATTEN MONO PAPER CUP!"
"AT 60 MILES AN HOUR, THE LOUDEST NOISE
IN THIS ROLLS ROYCE IS THE ELECTRIC CLOCK!"
7. Dramatize the claim, or its result:
"HERE'S AN EXTRA 850, GRACE—I'M MAKING BIG MONEY NOW!"
"THEY LAUGHED WHEN I SAT DOWN AT
THE PIANO—BUT WHEN I STARTED TO PLAY . . ."
8. State the claim as a paradox:
"HOW A BALD-HEADED BARBER SAVED MY
HAIR!"
"BEAT THE RACES BY PICKING LOSERS!"

54

3 8 WAYS T O S T R E N G T H E N YOUR H E A D L I N E

9. Remove limitations from the claim:
"SHRINKS
GERY!"

HEMORRHOIDS WITHOUT SUR-

"YOU BREATHE NO DUSTY ODORS WHEN
YOU DO IT WITH LEWYT!"
10. Associate the claim with values or people with whom
the prospect wishes to be identified:
"MICKEY MANTLE SAYS:
BOTHER MY THROAT!"

CAMELS

NEVER

"9 OUT OF 10 DECORATORS USE WUNDAWEAVE CARPETS FOR LONG LIFE AT LOW COST!"
11. Show how much work, in detail, the claim does:
"NOW! RELIEF FROM ALL 5 ACID-CAUSED
STOMACH TROUBLES—IK SECONDS!"
"RELIEVES CONGESTION IN ALL 7 NASAL
PASSAGES INSTANTLY!"
12. State the claim as a question:
"WHO ELSE WANTS A WHITER WASH—WITH
NO HARD WORK?"
"COULD YOU USE $25 A WEEK EXTRA INCOME?"
13. Offer information about how to accomplish the claim:
"HOW TO WIN FRIENDS AND INFLUENCE
PEOPLE!"
"HERE'S WHAT TO DO TO GET RID OF
PIMPLES FAST!"
14. Tie authority into the claim:
"BOSS MECHANIC SHOWS HOW TO AVOID
ENGINE REPAIR BILLS!"

38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H E N YOUR H E A D L I N E

"HERE'S WHAT DOCTORS DO WHEN THEY
FEEL ROTTEN!"
15. Before-and-after the claim:
"BEFORE COLDENE A CHILD GOT OVER A
COLD AFTER 5 DAYS OF ACHING, SNEEZING,
WHEEZING, DRIPPING, SUFFERING, COUGHING, CRYING, GAGGING, SPITTING."
"WITH COLDENE A CHILD GETS OVER A
COLD IN FIVE DAYS!"
16. Stress the newness of the claim:
"ANNOUNCING!
PLUGS!"

GUIDED

MISSILE

SPARK

"NOW! CHROME PLATE WITHOUT HEAT,
ELECTRICITY, MACHINERY!"
17. Stress the exclusivity of the claim:
"OURS ALONE! PERSIAN LAMB ORIGINALS—
$389.40!"
"ONLY GLEEM HAS GL-70 TO KEEP TEETH
CLEAN ALL DAY LONG WITH ONE BRUSHING!"
18. Turn the claim into a challenge for the reader:
"WHICH TWIN HAS THE TONI? AND WHICH
HAS THE $15 PERMANENT?"
"DOES SHE OR DOESN'T SHE? HAIR COLORING SO NATURAL ONLY HER HAIRDRESSER
KNOWS FOR SURE!"
19. State the claim as a case-history quotation:
"LOOK, MOM—NO CAVITIES!"
"WOULD YOU BELIEVE IT—I HAVE A COLD!"

•56

38 WAYS TO S T R E N G T H E N YOUR H E A D L I N E

20. Condense the claim—interchange your product and the
product it replaces:
"NOW! A RING AND PISTON JOB IN A TUBE!"
"POUR YOURSELF A NEW ENGINE!"
21. Symbolize the claim—replace the direct statement or
measurement of the claim with a parallel reality:
"STARTING NEXT TUESDAY, THE ATLANTIC
OCEAN BECOMES ONLY ONE-FIFTH AS LONG!"
22. Connect the mechanism to the claim in the headline:
"FLOATS FAT RIGHT OUT OF YOUR BODY!"
"FEEDS W\STE GAS FUMES BACK INTO
YOUR ENGINE!"
23. Startle the reader by contradicting the wav he thinks the
mechanism should work:
" H I T HELL OUT OF THE BALL WITH YOUR
RIGHT HAND,' SAYS TOMMY ARMOUR!"
24. Connect the need and the claim in the headline:
"THERE IS ONLY ONE SOLUTION TO AN ADVERTISING PROBLEM: FIND THE MAN!"
25. Offer information in the ad itself:
"WHY MEN CRACK . . ."
"WHAT EVERYBODY OUGHT TO KNOW ABOUT
THIS STOCK AND BOND BUSINESS!"
26. Turn the claim or the need into a case historv:
"AUNT MEG, WHO NEVER MARRIED . . ."
"AGAIN SHE ORDERS—A CHICKEN SALAD,
PLEASE'"

3 8 WAYS T O S T R E N G T H E N YOUR H E A D L I N E

57

27. Give a name to the problem or need:
"WHEN YOU'RE WEARY WITH DAY-TIME FATIGUE, TAKE ALKA-SELTZER."
28. Warn the reader about possible pitfalls if he doesn't use
the product:
"DON'T INVEST ONE CENT OF YOUR HARDEARNED MONEY UNTIL YOU CHECK THIS GUIDE!"
29. Emphasize the claim bv its phraseology—bv breaking it
into two sentences, or repeating it, or a part of it:
"A MAN YOU CAN LEAN ON! THAT'S KLOPERMAN!"
"NOBODY BUT NOBODY UNDERSELLS GIMBEL'S!"
30. Show how easv the claim is to accomplish bv imposing
a imiversallv-overcome limitation:
"IF YOU CAN COUNT TO ELEVEN, YOU CANINCREASE YOUR SPEED AND SKILL AT NUMBERS!"
31. State the difference in the headline:
"THE DIFFERENCE IN PREMIUM
LINES IS RIGHT IN THE ADDITIVES!"

GASO-

32. Surprise vour reader into realizing that former limitations have now been overcome:
"SEE WHAT HAPPENS WHEN YOU CRUSH A
HARTMAN DC-8? NOTHING!"
33. Address the people who can't buv vour product:
"IF YOU'VE ALREADY TAKEN YOUR VACATION, DON'T READ THIS. IT'LL BREAK YOUR
HEART."

58

3 8 WAYS T O S T R E N G T H E N YOUR H E A D L I N E

34. Address your prospect directly:
"TO THE MAN WHO WILL SETTLE FOR
NOTHING LESS THAN THE PRESIDENCY OF HIS
FIRM."
35. Dramatize how hard it was to produce the claim:
"WHEN JENS FINISHED DESIGNING THIS
CANDLEHOLDER WE HAD TO INVENT A WHOLE
NEW KIND OF CANDLE."
36. Accuse the claim of being too good:
"IS IT IMMORAL TO MAKE MONEY THIS
EASILY?"
37. Challenge the prospects present limiting beliefs:
"YOU ARE TWICE AS SMART AS YOU THINK."
38. Turn the claim into a question and answer:
"YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT'S UNDER THE
HOOD AND YOU COULDN'T CARE LESS AS LONG
AS YOUR CAR RUNS SMOOTHLY. WHO SHOULD
YOU SEE IF IT D O E S N ' T ? . . . SOMEONE WHO
CARES—UNITED DELCO."
And so on: an infinite number of variations. Trv to create
your own—tomorrow.

SUMMARY: THE ART OF
CREATIVE PLANNING—
H O W TO MAKE AN IDEA
GROW

Now, let's look at a few special
headline problems, and then sum up:

The Three Levels of Creativity
Something should be said here about the various approaches
copy writers use to dig up a new headline. As far as I can tell,
there are three of them:
The first, the shallowest, and the most widespread and ineffective, is the Word-Substitute Technique. Here the copy writer
consults a list of proven and successful headlines. He then pulls
out the original product name and substitutes his own; or his own
product's performance, etc. He usually comes up with something
like this:
"I'D WALK A MILE FOR A CUP OF BLANK
COFFEE!"
59

60

SUMMARY: T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

"WHY HAVEN'T BOAT OWNERS BEEN TOLD
THESE FACTS?"
"FLOATS UGLY PIMPLES RIGHT OUT OF YOUR
SKIN!"
If these ads are copied from a similar product, in the same
market, at the same time, then their chance of success is good—
especially if they embellish the promise in any way. But if the
product, or the market, or the timing is different, then the chances
of success diminish proportionately They become Echo Ads
ads that remind people of some other product. Thev pav no attention to unique product-market-timing relationship that exists
at the moment. Therefore they lose all the strengths that are
wrapped up in that relationship. They are the kind of ads that
clients write, rather than copy writers.
The second, deeper and more difficult approach is through
formulas. Here the copy writer has memorized a list of rules or
principles, and tries to pour his headline into them like he'd
pour hot lead into a mold. Such rules usually concern the way
a headline is expressed. They list methods of strengthening the
verbalization of the headline idea, and here thev have a perfectlyvalid use. Several examples of these principles are given in Chapter 4.
But the idea for an ad or a headline demands its own shape.
It cannot be fitted into someone else's solution. The problem defies a formula. And the third, analytical approach that we have
outlined above—with no answers; only guide-posts and questions—offers the onlv wav.
This is a hard fact to accept. It means that a solution which
has cost you days and weeks of painful effort, and which has
done its job perfectly—can be used only once. It means that
there are no creative shortcuts—that the effort must be duplicated
with each individual ad. But fortunately the techniques of
probing can be learned and perfected; intuition can be sharpened;

SUMMARY: T H E ART O F CREATIVE PLANNING

Di

a sensitivity can be developed for picking out the vital fact from
a maze of information.
And, of course, abandoning this effort leads to a reality which
is even harsher. Manx' copy writers grow old, or tired, or afraid.
They stop searching for the unique solution in every problem.
From this moment on, they begin to copy instead of create. And
most pathetic of all, main' begin to copy themselves. The more
successful the copv writer, the greater the temptation to find his
new headline in his old files.
But it won't work. Copying can be done by any cub. All this
process does is bring talent down to the level of file-cabinet mediocrity. The true copy writer must argue with success—he must
push on past it every time he faces a new product. In advertising, as well as in science and in art, the solution to the unique
lies only in itself.
On Motivation Research and Its
Relation to the Copy Writer
As we have repeated throughout this first part of the book,
the copy writer's primary job is to know his market. Many times,
he has to know more about that market than the market knows
about itself.
Before MR, he did this mostly by personal digging, reading,
talking—and guessing. With MR, lie has some pretty professional
guessers working with him. And they have the equipment to prove
their guesses far more easily and inexpensively than writing a
campaign and testing it.
The copy writer can use MR in two ways. It can be a
tremendous source of information to him. Information about
the most powerful needs and desires of his market—desires that
may be hidden, verbally unacceptable, or completely unknown.
It shows him the strength of those desires—their drift and momentum—the taboos that accompany them, and limit their expression. It helps him locate splits in his market—gauge their

62

SUMMARY: T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

points of difference—design pinpoint appeals for each of them.
And it feeds back to him early reactions to his own phraseology—to test his own worry-points in the ad—to enable him to
shift emphasis—and even to emerge with a completely new idea.
All well and good. But a motivation research finding is not
a headline, nor even the central theme of an ad, nor will it ever
be. Like any other fact, it is a direction. First it tells vou where
not to go, to avoid wasting your time. And then it indicates the
general area of your solution.
But the transformation of those facts into an idea, and the
expression of that idea in the strongest possible form, still requires as much creative talent as any other starting point. The
source of an idea, no matter how profound, is still only the beginning. The copy writer has to take it from there.
The second great service that MR can perform for the copywriter is that of testing his own hunches, in answering the questions he uncovers in dealing with his market over a period of
time.
For purposes of simplicity, we have dealt with advertising
strategy as though it always consisted of writing a single ad—
rather than a continuous campaign. By limiting ourselves in this
way, we have been able to deal with each of the phases of such
a campaign as though it were a separate and distinct problem,
requiring a separate and distinct advertisement to solve it. In
doing this, we have emphasized that a breakthrough can occur
at any stage of a campaign; and that the same breakthrough techniques can be used to produce the germ idea for the entire campaign that follows.
In reality, however, the copy writer usually works on a given
product, or in a given market area, for long periods of time. During that time he will write many ads on this same subject. And
during that time he will engage in a kind of discourse with his
market, in which he feeds that market ideas, and it feeds back
to him reactions to those ideas.
During this massive conversation, if he is sensitive, the copy

SUMMARY: T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

63

writer will pick up a continuous flow of the most vital information. Some of this information will be actual trends and preferences, which can be immediately translated into new ads. But
much more of it will be in negative form—failures, roadblocks,
limitations to the response from his ads. And only the statistical
measurements of these limitations will be shown—not their causes.
The copywriter will want to know why they occur. And in asking whv, he will give birth to questions like these:
What causes one woman to make most of her clothes at
home, and another woman to use her sewing machine only for
minor repairs?
How can we convince more people that it's safe to buy
through mail order?
Why will men instantlv buy an automatic potato peeler—and
women send it right back to the store again?
These are research questions. They deal with psychological
dimensions. The copv writer discovers them, and passes them
along to his MR people to be phrased, tested and answered. Thus
is born a new idea, a new theme, and a new headline, perhaps
even a new campaign.
On Expressing the Personality of a
Product in Your Headline
One of the most potent discoveries of motivation research
is that a product, or a store, or a whole group of products has a
distinct and complete personality to the consumer. This personality is a complex quality, embracing many traits. In the case of
the Cadillac, for example, it consists of quality, prestige, performance, appearance, comfort, resale value, freedom from repairs
and much more.
But—and this is the important point to consider in writing
vour headline—one of these traits will always be the most effective in summarizing and expressing this personality. In the case
of Cadillac, it has always been, and will always be, quality. This

64

SUMMARY: T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

summary trait is featured in a series of headlines, or headline illustrations—perhaps blended with one or two of the other traits
to give it variety but always strengthening those other traits bv
interrelating them to this one dominant quality.
Thus the personality is simplified, symbolized and sharpened to grasp the reader. And then—as the reader moves on
through the body copy of the ad—this personality is expanded
and examined in all its appeals—an ever-enlarging pyramid of
persuasion, drawing in all the necessary information—charging
that information with desire—terminating inevitably in the one
source of satisfaction for that desire—vour product.
We will examine this concept more thoroughly in Chapter
8—on Identification.
On the Only Type of Prevention Headline That Will Sell
Many copy writers believe that no prevention headline (because it treats a problem that may occur and that is not actually
plaguing your prospect at this moment) can ever be effective.
The reason they give for this failure is the inability of the prospect
to identify himself with a problem that has not already forced itself upon him.
This is true—but only for those problems which affect him
personally. He is perfectly capable of imagining such problems
afflicting his loved ones, his friends, his wife and children, even
his nation. This is why decay-preventing toothpaste sold so well
when the ads focussed the decay, not on the parent, but on the
children. This is why life insurance can be sold, not by picturing
the prospects death, but the horrors inflicted upon his wife and
children if insufficient money is left over to take care of them.
To sum up: A man will not visualize future disasters occurring to himself, but he is perfectly capable of visualizing, and
buying preventatives from, the image of such future problems
affecting others around him.

SUMMARY:': T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

65

On the Selection of Splinter Markets to Avoid Competition
Throughout this book, we have assumed that each competitor in a market will trv to advertise to that market as a whole.
For example, that every reducing aid will try to sell all women
that are interested in losing weight.
This assumption is not necessarily true, in at least two respects. First, it assumes that such a market is all of one piece (for
example, that all women want to lose weight for the same reason).
Thev do not, of course. There are at least two major sub-categories
in the market—those who want to lose weight for appearance reasons, and those who must lose weight because of their health. The
same general appeal—LOSE WEIGHT—will be effective with
both. But certainly the mechanisms should vary—speed and ease
in the first—safetv and permanence in the second.
Secondly, a small company with a limited budget may avoid
competing with larger rivals for the core of the market, and may
concentrate its attack on a smaller segment of that market. This
is usually done regionally. But it may be even more effective if
it is based on the sociology of the market rather than its geography. For example, a reducing aid may decide to abandon the
greater appearance segment of the market, and appeal much more
specifically to the health segment. This deliberate focussing of
the appeal would alter every aspect of the campaign, from the
headline, through identification copy, through mechanism and
substantiation—right down to the selection of media and channels of distribution. (Health and geriatric magazines, and distribution through doctors rather than drug stores.)
Eventually, of course, if the appeal is successful and the budget grows, then the advertiser can decide to invade the majority
market. If he does this, the success of the initial limited campaign can be used as a point of difference to appeal to the larger
market. For example, the fact that women who were forced to
lose weight permanently relied on this product more than twice
as often as any other, etc.

66

SUMMARY: T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

In Summary
The first five chapters of this book, which vou have just finished, describe a process which may take days, or weeks, or
months to complete.
This process begins with a thorough analysis of the market
for your client's product—with an attempt to measure the breadth
and depth of that market—to identify the gigantic emotional forces
that create that market—to define and focus those forces in terms
of a single image or desire or need—and to channel those forces
toward one inevitable solution—vour client's product.
In order to do this, the second step of this process involves
a meticulous study of the product itself—what it is and what it
does—the physical product that you will deliver, and the functional product that you will sell—all its various satisfactions and
performances—again focussed to a single image, a single identification, a single claim that will tap the greatest possible emotional force within your market.
The combination of these first and second steps gives you
the theme of your ad—the desire your market demands and its
satisfaction . . . the need your market feels and its solution . . . the
identification your market gropes for and its expression.
And once you discover this theme, you begin the process of
expressing it. You explore the state of maturity of vour market.
You find out how much people know about vour product and
what it does—how much they've been told about similar products—and how much they care about both.
Out of this analysis comes the point of entrv for vour headline—the point of contact—the point of greatest interest and
acceptance on the part of your prospect. It may be located anywhere—in your product itself, in its price, in its performance,
in the satisfaction your product promises, in the need vour market demands from your product, or only in the market itself.
But, wherever it is, this is the point where vou start. Here the
searching and the planning stop. Here the words begin.

SUMMARY: T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

Again, this process may take weeks or even months. And at
the end of that time, you may have written five or ten words.
These five or ten words will make up about 90% of the value
of your ad. If you are right, they may start a new industry. If you
are wrong, nothing you write after them will save your ad. Copy
writing—on the idea level—is an all or nothing profession. You
build your idea, piece by piece . . . you crowd it into five or ten
words . . . and then it stands or dies by itself. And everything that
follows it, stands or dies with it. This is why we have devoted so
much time to this planning process.
And it is a process. You don't get an idea or a headline—
vou either build it, or vou unfold it, petal by petal. You dig it
out of the market research . . . vou wring it out of the product . . .
you read, you listen, you experiment for yourself. You work—
hard. You rub up against this product and this market so hard
that they seep into vour pores. And—above everything else—you
remember this cardinal ride of creativity:
What you are looking for in this product and this market is
the one element that makes them unique. The idea you want—
the headline you want—the breakthrough you want—are all
wrapped up inside that product and that market. Nowhere else.
And no outside ride—no outside formula will give them to
you. You are facing a product-market-timing relationship that
never happened before—it is unique. And the solution you need
is just as unique.
What this first part of the book has tried to give vou is not
molds, but compasses. Not formulas to copy word by word, or
rules to rigidlv follow. But rather guide-posts to set your thinking in the right direction. Specifically and technically, these guideposts fall into two classes:
The first are analytical procedures. Their purpose is to break
down a complicated problem into its parts . . . to examine those
parts one bv one . . . to find out which is the most important—
and to start your solution from there.
Once you have done this, you then begin to build up your

68

SUMMARY: T H E ART OF CREATIVE PLANNING

solution to its greatest power. You do this bv removing limiting
factors, and bv adding everything you can find that will strengthen
your idea. If we wrote literature instead of advertising, these two
processes would be called conception and execution. In copy writing, we sav that we get the main theme for our ad, and then we
put it into a headline.
And when vou have finished, vou have five or ten words. If
thev are the right words, thev will be immensely valuable. But
they still will be onlv the start. Thev are the end of one road, and
the beginning of another. Thev are the imitation to vour ad—the
hand vou extend to your prospect for vour product. Your job is
now to make that introduction worth while—for both parties.
In the remainder of the book, we shall discuss the techniques of writing the bodv copy of vour ad. These techniques are
directed toward one end: building conviction—not onlv instilling
the desire for vour product, but actually strengthening that desire with the belief that that product will DO what the prospect
wants.
We now turn to this process of building vour ad, so that vour
ad builds conviction.

PART 2
THE SEVEN BASIC
TECHNIQUES OF
BREAKTHROUGH
ADVERTISING
How to write body copy
as strong as your headline

6
INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT'S
MEND—WHAT MAKES
PEOPLE READ, WANT,
BEIJEVE

You have now built vour headline.
You now have a means of stopping your prospect—of bringing
to a momentary halt all the diverse activities of his mind—of focussing his attention, at least for a moment, on a single thought.
This is the job that you have designed vour headline to do—not
to sell, or identify your product, or even mention the need or
desire that your product satisfies—but simply and solelv to flag
down your prospect, and get him to read your first paragraph.
From that moment on, your body copy does the selling. It
does this by altering your prospect's vision of reality. It creates
a new world for your prospect—a world in which your product
emerges as the fulfillment of the dominant desire that caused this
man to respond to your headline.
To create this world, your copy must expand or alter one
or more of the three dimensions of his alreadv-existing mental
world. This is the task of the remainder of your ad. Your copv
71

lA

INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT'S MIND

must be long enough to accomplish this change—and the length
of your ad will depend on three factors:
First, how much copy you need to build his desire for that
product—and everything that product can do for him—to its
greatest possible strength.
Second, how much additional copy you need to make him
feel both comfortable and complimented bv that product, to enable him to visualize that product as a part of the life structure
that he has built, and is building, for himself.
And, finally, how much additional copy vou need to make
him believe what you have said—to compensate for his alreadyexisting prejudices and beliefs.
The answers to these three questions determine not onlv the
length of your ad, but also its structure, its development, its
style and its pace. Each of these questions relates to a separate
dimension of your prospect's mind—different wavs he has of arranging thoughts and feelings. In this chapter, we will examine
these three dimensions briefly, and sketch in what wavs, and to
what extent, you can alter or expand them through vour ad. And
then, in the following chapters, we will detail these mechanisms
of persuasion thoroughly along with the most effective techniques
of presenting them.
And then, in the last chapter, we will trv to weave them
together into a simple, straight-line, logical progression of images
—leading your reader from the headline, through the product, to
the actual purchase.
Let us start with these three dimensions of thought and
feeling:

1. Desires
These are the wants, needs, cravings, thirsts, hungers, lusts,
etc. that drive your prospect through life. They are physical—such
as the desire to be thin, or strong, or healthy, or free from acne,
corns, bad breath or what have vou. Thev are material—such as

INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT'S MIND

73

the desire to possess monev, or a big car, or a beautiful dress.
Thev are sensual—such as the thirst for a cold glass of beer, or
the need for a tired bodv to stretch out on a soft bed.
They have, of course, tremendous driving power. And thev
already exist. You cannot create them, diminish them, or battle
them. But you can expand them, sliarpen them, channel them,
and give them a goal. And this is vour primary task as a copy
writer.
Your first task—and in some ads vour only task—is to make
vour prospect want. To sharpen his desire. To picture every moment of its fulfillment. To let him see it, feel it, touch it, sit in
it, listen to his friends rave about it. To make him visualize the
wonderful new world your product offers him so strongly that he
practically lives in it—and then to offer him that product. The
method of doing this—Intensification—will be discussed in the
next chapter.
2. Identifications
These are the roles vour prospect wants to play in life, and
the personality traits he wants vour product to help him build,
or project.
These longings for identification—longings for a sharplydefined personality—longings for social status—are, of course, not
materia] or physical or sensual at all. Thev complement and intensify the physical desires—add another dimension to them—
bv making each purchase serve a double duty. Thus, not only
does a woman buy a low-calorie food to become thin, but in so
doing she also builds again a radiant, attractive, youthful personality. And not only does a man buy a car for the power, speed
and transportation it will give him, but equally as much for the
projection of prestige, success and readv-cash-to-burn that this
purchase communicates to his neighbors.
Call them what you will—goals, hopes, dreams, ambitions,
envies, admirations, phantasies or objectives—these subtle, svm-

INSIDE YOUR P R O S P E C T S MIND

bolic, never-openly-spoken projections of our own self-images are
immensely powerful sales forces. Your task is to put them directly
behind your product. To make him feel the prestigious and select group he joins when he becomes a user of that product. To
picture for him the people who live in vour product's world todav.

3. Beliefs
These are the opinions, attitudes, prejudices, fragments of
knowledge and conceptions of reality that vour prospect lives bv.
This is the world of emotionalized reason that he inhabits—the
way he accepts or rejects facts and builds up his universe, the
types of thinking he uses to arrive at decisions, the ideas and values which give him comfort and which he believes are permanent and true.
These ideas may be shallow or profound, valid or false, perfectly logical or mere wishful thinking. But it is not advertising's
mission to argue with them. And no one advertiser can change
them. Advertising is not education; it does not have societv as its
sponsor, nor does it have the vears of time that are given to education to produce results.
Advertising, like science, must accept reality as it exists, not
as it might wish it to exist. Only then can it alter reality—not bv
smashing into it head-on—but bv exploiting its tendencies and
giving direction to its energies.
Believing is a process—a process of fitting new facts into
certain established patterns of thought and conviction. People believe in certain ways. These beliefs form a filter through which
your product-information must pass or be rejected. And their
already-established patterns of reasoning create habit-channels
along which your copy must build its conviction—or die.
You start with these beliefs as a base. You build up from them
by using his kind of logic, not vour own, to prove that vour product satisfies his desires—to prove that your product works—to

INSIDE YOUR PROSPECT S MIND

prove that his kind of people rely on your product—to prove that
no other product satisfies his needs as well.
The mechanisms for doing this are shown in Chapters 9
and 10.
There you have them. Desires. . . . Identifications. . . . Beliefs.
Each of them composed of equal parts of emotion and thought.
The three dimensions of vour prospect's mind—the raw materials with which you will work.
To study them, we shall deal with each of them separatelv.
But, in actually writing your ad, of course, you will weave them
into each other—to create a simple, fluid path of thought from
the beginning to the end of vour ad. This technique—Blending
and Reinforcement—will be the subject of Chapter 14.

7
THE FIRST TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY:
INTENSIFICATION

Thirteen Ways to Strengthen Desire
The force that creates sales, that
powers our present economy, is desire. Mass Desire, spread among
millions of men and women. And the art of salesmanship, fundamentally and primarily, is expanding this desire. Expanding it
horizontally, among more and more people. Expanding it vertically by sharpening and magnifying it—by building it to such a
pitch that it overcomes the obstacles of skepticism, lethargy and
price, and results in the sale.
Advertising is salesmanship in print. Therefore, above everything else, advertising is the literature of desire. It is society's encyclopedia of dreams . . . our twentieth-century Wish Book. Advertising gi y e s form and content to desire. It provides it with a goal.
These desires, as they exist in the mind of vour prospect
today, are indistinct. They are blurs—hazy, ambiguous, not yet

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

crystallized into words or images. In most cases, tliev are simply
vague emotions, without compulsion or direction. And as such,
they have only a fraction of their true potential power.
Your job is to fill out these vague desires with concrete images—to show your prospect every possible way that they can be
fulfilled—to multiply their strength by the number of satisfactions
that you can suggest to achieve them.
A copy writer's first qualifications are imagination and enthusiasm. You are literally the script writer for vour prospect's
dreams. You are the chronicler of his future. Your job is to show
him in minute detail all the tomorrows that vour product makes
possible for him.
This is the core of advertising—its fundamental function. To
take unformulated desire, and translate it into one vivid scene of
fulfillment after another. To add the appeal of concrete satisfaction after satisfaction to the basic drive of that desire. To make
sure that your prospect realizes everything that he is getting—
everything that he is now leaving behind him—everything that
he may possibly be missing.
The sharper you can draw vour pictures—and the greater
the number of them that you can legitimately present—the more
your prospect will demand your product, and the less important
will seem your price.
How much space can you give to this process of Intensification? This depends on two factors—the amount of space allotted
to you for the entire ad, and the number of wavs vou can present
your images without giving the feeling of repetition or boredom.
First of all, different media demand different treatments. For
example, catalogs, small-space newspaper and magazine advertising, radio and television strictly limit the number of words
given to you to draw your images. To fit vour message into their
structures, you must use either or both of two techniques. The
first is compression—the boiling down of projections and images
into a few key words. And the second is the campaign—the repetition of these key words over and over again—along with a

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: INTENSIFICATION

79

progression of embellishments and differentiations—through an
entire series of advertisements.
We shall see how this is done, in detail, at the end of this
chapter.
On the other hand, large-space newspaper and magazine advertising and especially direct mail give you adequate room, in
most cases, to present a full story In these media, the decision
as to length depends far more on the second factor—the number of ways you can present your images without giving the feeling of repetition or boredom.
No matter what you do, your prospect will take with him
only one basic idea, one dominant image from vour ad. But with
every additional new and different wav that vou can present that
idea, it becomes sharper and more real in vour prospect's mind,
and it builds up more and more emotional weight.
Thus the problem becomes one of perspective, of fresh viewpoints, of new and different detail. Of walking around vour product in your imagination, and presenting it to your prospect in
ever}* way in which it enters his life.
You are working against two opposing forces. The first, as in
your headline, is the amount of material which has already been
presented to your prospect about similar products in other ads.
There are stages of market sophistication to be dealt with in bodv
copy as well as in your headline. If your prospect has read the
same phraseology before, he will be bored bv it, no matter where
he encounters it again.
And the second obstacle is the phraseology of vour own ad.
Once you have presented your basic fulfillment in a certain wav;
then you must vary your viewpoint in your second description,
or not present it again. Otherwise you will lose vour reader in
the middle of vour ad.
You cannot repeat, but you can reinforce. And every time
the same basic promise is given a fresh setting for vour prospect,
it reinforces the descriptions that went before it, and makes vour
prospect that much more determined to participate.

80

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

The presenting of a series of fresh, new and different fulfillments for your prospects dominant desire—our first mechanism of persuasion—is called Intensification. It takes many forms,
with many more certainly to be inyented. We will list some of
them here, giving the complete copy examples to show how thev
have been worked out to deal with specific copy problems.
Our illustrations in this part of the book will be drawn mostly
from mail order. The reason for this is simple. Mail order advertising must accomplish its sale from a single ad, without relying on the cumulative force of the campaign, and without help
from product display or salespeople. Therefore, mail order tries
to present as much of the complete story as possible at one time.
These same techniques apply equally well to all forms of advertising. But there the}- are usually quite compressed, and their
purpose and structure was not quite so apparent.
Here are these techniques of Intensification:

Your First Presentation of Your Claims
1. First present the product or the satisfaction it gives directly—bluntly—by a thorough, completely detailed description of
its appearance or the results it gives. For example, this rose ad:
MORE ROSES THAN YOU EVER SAW
ON ANY ROSE BUSH . . .
Leading Eastern Agricultural College reports: This fabulous rose variety produced 500 blooms in June . . . 1523
more blooms in July. . . 1616 more blooms in August. . .
437 more blooms in September . . . 4,076 rases all from one
single plant. . .
Can you imagine the fantastic beauty of a rosebush
that can easily give you MORE THAN 4,000 ROSES from
June to September—and then keeps on blooming heavily
right up into frost . . .
Can you imagine the fantastic thrill of walking into
your garden and actually picking 3 dozen, even 4 dozen

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: INTENSIFICATION

81

roses a day from a single plant, dav after day, week alter
week—and still leave gigantic clusters of bloom on each
single plant.
Colorful, fragrant roses almost as large as the most expensive Hvbrid Teas, vet blooming bv the hundreds at one
single time . . . on one single bush! Cherrv-pink 3-inch roses
overlaid with tinges ol red that deepen in fire and brilliance as the blossoms unfold—to reveal a dazzling gold
splash on their petals! Roses that burst into living walls of
blossoms that flame again and again into exquisite masses
of bloom in June, Julv, August, September, October, November . . . and often stav in bloom weeks after the first
snows have fallen! . . .
This is the rose with such fantastic blooming power
that it will actually give vou huge clusters of 10, 12 even
15 flowers on a single stem . . . and produce those clusters
in solid masses of bloom! Clusters as large as both of your
outstretched hands put together . . . clusters that actuallv
measure up to one full foot across . . . each stem a complete floral bouquet in itself. . . that gives vou an average
of more than 50 NEW ROSES dav after dav, week after
week, for 8, 9 even 10 weeks in a row during the hot "dog
davs" of summer. . . Enough roses to fill everv room in
vour house with color and fragrance all summer long . . .
Enough roses to drench vour terrace with beautv, to sweep
around vour home and flood vour beds, vour borders, vour
walks, vour driveway with solid, living walls of roses all
summer long . . . with just a few plants!
And this is the rose you can have blooming in vour
garden now and for years to come, that will make vour
grounds the garden showplaee of the neighborhood, if
vou accept this extraordinary flower offer now! . . .
Or, as another example, this description of the results of a
Christmas flashlight projector that shows colored slides of the

Bible:
. . . You take out the amazing invention we send vou.
You simplv switch it on. And suddenly even/ person in the
room draws in his breath in excitement and admiration!

82

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: INTENSIFICATION

For there before vou on that living room wall—projected four feet wide bv three feet tall—is one of the most
beautiful pictures you have ever seen! Before vour eves—
so real that you can praeticallv reach out and touch her—
is the Virgin Mary holding the Infant Jesus in her arms.
The picture actually glows with exquisite color. You can see
every magnificent detail . . . the animals huddled around the
manger . . . the tenderness in the Virgins eves . . . the smile
on the Infant's face.
It's almost as though you were actuallv there! Suddenly all the wonderful tales your children have heard . . .
all the meaning and glorv of Christmas . . . come alive before your children's eves! Life-sized . . . as tall as vour children . . . scene after scene parades before them on their
living room wall! They actuallv see the Angel of God announcing the Birth to the Shepherds! Thev witness the
Star of Bethlehem rising over the world! Thev stand side
by side with the Three Wise men in silent adoration!
Before their very eyes, thev see Christ grow to maturity. They watch him astound the elders of the Temple
as a small child. They thrill to his first meeting with John
the Baptist. They are present at the Sermon on the Mount.
They witness each of the miracles—see with their own eves
Jesus calming the storm . . . teaching Peter to walk on the
water . . . raising Lazarus from the dead.
Can there be any more thrilling experience? Suddenly
every sermon thev have ever heard . . . overv book thev
have ever read . . . every prayer they have ever learned,
takes on new meaning and beauty for them. This is probably the most thrilling hour you will ever spend with vour
children. They will ask you to repeat it time and time again.
These magnificent pictures will continue to thrill and astound and instruct them for years to come . . .
Or, as another example, this description of the outward appearance of a giant flying plastic model jet:
. . . Yes! Just imagine the expression on vour children's
faces, when they walk into vour living room just one week
from today, and suddenly see this magnificent model airplane standing in front of them on the living room table!

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: I N T E N S I F I C

83

Here is a gigantic, three-dimensional, all plastic model
airplane—resting securely on its own triple landing gear—
and so huge that its tail section alone stands six full rnehes
from the table!
This magnificent model airplane proudly bears the
official colors of Pan American Airways! Its wings and engines are a dazzling silver! Its fuselage is a gleaming white—
with a brilliant blue stripe stretching back twentv-one inches
along the entire length of the bodv! And stamped on both
sides of the huge rudder is the Fan American World Globe—
and the American flag above it. ready to identify this plane
anywhere she goes!
Both the wings and the tail section are slanted diagonally back—ready to cut through the air at 600 scale miles
an hour! And suspended beneath the wings are the four
huge engines—each as long and as thick as vour child's
fingers—each with its own JET SOUND SIMULATOR, to
give your child thrill after thrill after thrill WHEN HE
ACTUALLY FLIES THIS BREATH-TAKING MODEL
HIMSELF! . .

Put the Claims in Action
2. Now that you have presented your main description, you
are ready to expand the image. One of the most effective ways
to do this is to PUT THE PRODUCT IN ACTION for your reader.
To show, not only how the product looks, and what benefits it
gives the reader, hut exactly how it does this. As one example,
let's continue with our model jet airplane ad:
No Fuel! No Danger! No Crack-Ups! Yet It Flies 600
Scale Miles An Hour, All Under Your Complete Control!
Pick this magnificent plastic model up from the table.
and hand it to your child. While he holds it, simply attach
the U-Control Line as we show vou to the left wing. Then
suspend the model from this control line, and begin slowlv
to swing it through the air. Before your astonished eyes.
you will see one of the most thrilling sights of vour entire
life!

84

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

This model is perfectly designed for high-speed flight!
As soon as it picks up power from the motion of vour hand,
it will lift up its nose, its wings will begin to cut through
the air, it will flash upward and streak ahead of vou! As vou
give it more and more line, it will turn wider and wider.
fly faster and faster . . . You can flv it in circles only five feet
wide, or you can take it outdoors and flv it in gigantic arcs
one hundred feet wide—the size of an entire eitv lot . . .
You can make this plane soar upward—stall at fantastic heights—dive toward the ground—and then pick up
speed and flash upward again in a breath-taking rescue! . . .
You can spiral this magnificent model down into a perfect
landing! You can fly two or more planes in formation! You
can have jet races! You can have an entire fleet of breathtaking models flown by every member of vour family—and
you can have them for only $1 apiece—less than ONEFIFTH the price you'd pay for a plastic model of this size
and performance! . . .
Or, as another example, this product-in-action description
from a brochure selling a self-propelled fish lure:
. . . Think of it! To fuel up this amazing, live-action
lure, all vou do is this. Simply snap open the fuel chamber—pour in the absolutely harmless fuel—and close the
fuel chamber again! . . . Simply cast or lower that powerpacked lure into fresh or salt water—and get set for the
fishing thrill of your life!
For perhaps one minute, the lure will float quietly on
the surface of the water. But then that water will reach the
fuel charge inside—the lure will seem to shudder for a second—and then it will spring dramatically to "life"!
The air around it will be filled with the buzzing sound
of a dying bee! Instantly, the nose of the lure will point
downward, and it will begin its first descent! Slowly, jerkily, like a maimed minnow, it will swim noisily downward—buzzing and humming—traveling about nine feet
every fifteen seconds! If no fish intercepts it, it will then
automatically stop its descent—slowly raise up its nose—
and begin its irresistible climb to the surface again!

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I O N

85

And again! And again! Tirelessly—hour after hour—
lengthening out the reach of vour own casts! Roaming restlessly oyer eyerv foot of water beneath vou—even on a
slack line—e\*en when your boat is tied up—eyen when
you're curled up on the dock, sound asleep! . . .
And driving the fish around you into such a frenzy
with its swimming and its buzzing that they practically tear
the rod out of vour hands—they're so anxious to get their
mouths into the hook! . . .
Bring In the Reader
3. Or, if vour product lends itself to this kind of treatment,
put your reader right smack in the middle of this product-in-action
story, and give him a verbal demonstration of icJiat will happen
to him the first day he owns that product. For example, this passage from an ad selling a power booster for the average car:
. . . Picture this to yourself! Next weekend vou go
down to vour car—the same tired car that you've been driving for years. You've made only one simple change to that
car, so easy that vour sixteen year old son could do it. But
now, when you turn on the ignition, a modern miracle of
engineering science comes to life under your hood!
From the very first moment, you'll see and feel the
difference in that engine! . . . When vou release the emergency brake, vour car will glide out of its parking space—
roll down the street with vour foot hardlv touching the gas
pedal. Every 30 or 40 seconds, you'll give that car an extra
shot of gas—feeling it spurt ahead—testing the new power
that's singing underneath vour foot!
We ask vou to pull up to another car at the stop light,
of approximately the same year and make as your own!
Wait until the light changes from red to green. Let the
other car start first. Wait till the other car gets half way
across the street. And then slam your foot down on the gas
pedal!
Before that other car has even crossed the street, vou
will have caught up with him. For one brief second, vou
and that other car will race fender to fender. And then vou

86

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I O N

will flash away from him . . . you will leave him a full block
behind . . . you will look in your rear view mirror and see
the startled look of amazement on the other drivers face! . . .

Show Him H o w to Test Your Claims
4. But there is still more room to expand the image along
these lines. Turn the demonstration into a test. Let your reader
visualize himself proving the performance of your product—gaining its benefits immediately—in the most specific and dramatic
way possible. For example, in this ad, selling a new kind of spark

plug:
. . . when you get your set of SA FIRE L\"JECTORS,
here is all you do. If you have an automatic transmission,
make a note of how fast your car crawls forward when it
is in the drive position, with the motor idling. If vou have
a sports car, a racing car or boat, make a note of the RPM's
as indicated on the tachometer when the engine is idling.
If you have regular transmission, put your car in low gear
on a level road and notice its speed with the motor idling.
Next . . . screw your injectors right into the spark plug openings ...
Now, if you have an automatic transmission—put vour
car in drive and let your engine idle. If vour car stood still
with spark plugs, it will now move forward at from 4 to 6
miles an hour; that means that the amount of gas that just
kept your engine turning over will now carrv vou up to 6
miles at no cost to you.
If you have a racing or sports car or a boat with a
tachometer, your RPM's will increase up to 200 more at
idling and up to 300 more at high speeds.
If you have regular transmission, in low gear with vour
motor idling your car will move forward 4 to 6 miles per
hour faster. In other words, no matter what vou drive, here
is absolute proof that you can go further, faster and
cheaper...

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: INTENSIFICATION

8/

Or, as another example, this demonstration-test from an ad
selling a memory course, with the headline, "Give Me One Evening and I'll Give vou a Push-Button Memory":
. . . Take this book and turn to page 39. Read eight
short pages—no more. And then, put down the book. Review in vour own mind the one simple secret I've shown
vou. And then—get readv to test your new AUTOMATIC
memorv!
What vou are going to do, in that very first evening,
is this. Without referring to the book, you are going to sit
down, and you are going to write—not five, not ten, but
TWENTY important facts that vou have never been able
to memorize before! If vou are a business man, they may
be customers' orders that you have received . . . if you are
a salesman, they may be twenty different products in your
line . . . if vou are a housewife, they. . . .
In any case, vou are simplv going to glance over that
list again for a few moments. You are going to perform a
simple mental trick on each one of these facts—that will
burn that fact into vour mind, permanently and automatically! And then vou are going to put that list away . . .
And the next morning, vou are going to amaze your
friends and family! When vou go down to business, you
will attend to everyone of those orders—automatically—
without referring to vour memo pad!. . . .
Yes! And you'll amaze vour friends by remembering
every product in vour line—backwards and forwards—in
the exact order that vou memorized them! You'll keep every7
single appointment on time—because one appointment will
automatically flash into vour mind after another—at the
precise moment vou need them—exactly as though you
pushed a mental button!
All this—in a single evening!. . . .
Stretch Out Your Benefits in Time
5. The number of variations, of fresh, startling viewpoints is
endless. Here is another departure from the product-in-action
theme: showing the product at work, not for just an hour or a

88

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

day, but over a span of weeks and months. Here vou extend vour
reader's vision further and further into time—showing him a continuous flow of benefits. This passage is taken from an ad for an
English plant food:
. . . First, the amazing English pellets give vour plants
a tremendous new burst of growth! New plants and old—
they send out dozens of hidden shoots and buds! Some of
your plants may actually DOUBLE in height and breadth
the verv first month!
But this is just the beginning! Within one or two short
weeks—without your even touching vour plant—this amazing pellet AUTOMATICALLY begins the second stage of
its work! It automatically sends out a second wonder-working
nutrient—that enters into even cell of vour plants' bodies—that fills those cells with health and strength and sturdiness . . . Great, tall stems stand up with militarv precision!
Giant buds begin to swell with vigor and vitalitv! Even tired
old shrubs and trees—that you had almost given up for
lost—begin to straighten out—fatten up—send out the voung
green growth that you had never hoped to see again!
And then, the most remarkable part of all! Just as
these fantastically beautiful plants have reached their full,
glorious height and strength—at that moment these tinv
English pellets automatically liberate still a third wonderworking ingredient!. . . .
And when that third precious ingredient reaches those
buds—then that verv morning vou will open the door to
vour house—AND YOU WILL BE BLINDED BY THE
EXPLOSION OF COLOR THAT GREETS YOU IN
YOUR GARDEN! . . . You will see rose bushes weighted
down with masses of blossoms, of a richness and perfume
and color you have never imagined before! You will see
dahlias and asters and gladiolas so massive, so exquisite, so
breath-takingly beautiful that you can hardlv believe that
they are the same plants that you put in the ground! And
when your neighbors begin to pour into your vard—when
you watch them bend and touch these flowers to see if
they are real—THEN YOU WILL KNOW A FEELING
OF GARDEN ACCOMPLISHMENT AND PRIDE THAT
YOU NEVER DREAMED OF BEFORE!. . . .

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I O N

89

Bring In an Audience
6. At the end of this passage, other actors besides the reader
are brought into the scene. Each one of them—each group of
them—provides a fresh new perspective through which your
reader can view the product. Seen through their eyes—experienced through their actions and reactions—the product performances become new, vivid and completely different again.
These new participants mav be celebrities, who relate their
experiences through the testimonial. This technique is too familiar to warrant an example here. Or they may be average men
and women, whom the reader easily identifies with, whose experiences are related through narration or the case history. Probably the most famous example of a narration is the "They Laughed
When I Sat Down at the Piano" ad quoted in the first section of
this book. Here, as an example of the case-history approach, we
use a passage from a reducing ad:
. . . And then, if vou were like the men and women
whose fantastic case histories were reported by leading medical journals, perhaps vou went to vour doctor and asked
him for AN EASY WAY OUT—WITHOUT TORTURE—
AND WITHOUT SLIDING BACK! . . .
These doctors had the answer in a tinv grev pill—and
a common-sense plan . . .
Thev instructed dozens of patients to test this miracle plan in their own homes, under these doctors' supervision. These men and women did NOT give up the
foods they loved—thev simply and naturally cut down on
them!
Thev were not given anv starvation diets . . . thev reported, in case after case, that thev felt more pep. more
energy, more youth and vitality than thev had known for
years!
And then, dav bv day, faster and easier and safer than
they had ever known before, the uglv excess fat around
their bodies melted away! While thev were eating three
delicious meals a dav, thev were shedding as much as five
pounds a week! While thev were feasting on mouth-water-

90

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: INTENSIFICATION

ing steaks, thick juicy slices of roast beef, potatoes, butter
and bread—they were losing inch after inch after inch from
around their waistlines, their thighs, their hips. Clothes that
they had discarded years before began to come out of the
closets and attics. Men and women both—they beam to
notice a new young look to their chins and faces that thev'd
thought thev'd lost forever.
And when the plan was over . . . these men and women
had lost as much as 17 and 25 and even 34 pounds . . . thev
had turned back their weight clock 5. 10 and even 15
years . . . And their trim, slim figures were just beginning. . . .

Show Experts Approving
7. But not only celebrities and ordinary people can be used
to reaffirm the product benefits. Experts in the fcld—professionals—the sophisticated, the discriminating, the blase can be called
on to register their reactions. There is nothing so astounding as
the astonishment of experts. Here the elements of surprise, competition and discovery all combine to sharpen the image even
more. This example is taken from the rose ad mentioned above:
. . . Just picture the scene as these college horticulturists began this amazing flowering test of roses. For here
gathered in a test field were all the highh -praised queens
of rosedom . . . floribundas, hybrid teas, polvanthas,
patented roses and rose blends that today sell lor as high
as $3.75 for a single plant. Row upon row of roses . . . prizewinners in international competition . . . the best the world
has to offer. . . AND THEN, NEARLY WILD STARTED
TO BLOOM!
Just picture the astonishment on these experts' faces
when in the first month alone, Nearly Wild produced over
15 times more blossoms than the average of all other roses
combined; how in July alone it produces an average of 50
new roses a day, more than 7 times as many blossoms as
the second leading rose! How in August it produced 21
times more roses than its nearest competitor; and then
went on. . . .

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

91

Is it anv wonder that a famous rose expert upon viewing the results of this test, exclaimed: "Why, it's like having a complete rose garden of 20 plants—all on a single
bush!" Or whv another rose expert, shaking his head in disbelief, stated: "If we ever released these flowering figures
to the public, they'd never believe it. And if they did believe it, we couldn't produce Nearly Wild rose plants to fill
the demand in the next 25 vears!". . . .

Compare, Contrast, Prove Superiority
8. Each new approach suggests others. The competition can
be carried into contrast. The disadvantages of the old product or
service can he laid side by side with the advantages of the new—
throwing these advantages into sharp relief. Here, as one example, is a brief, three-sentence passage from a book-club radio
commercial that establishes the difference between random buying and book-club savings indelibly on the listener's mind:
. . . Yes! While vour friends were paying $3.95 for their
copies of Frank Yerbv's run-away best seller, The Golden
Hawk, Dollar Book Club members were getting the same
exact book for only 99c • While your friends were paying
$4.95 for John O'Hara's flaming new thriller, A Rage to
Live, Dollar Book Club members were getting the same
exact book for only 99c1. And while your friends were paying $5.95 for Thomas B. Costain's towering new triumph.
High Toicers, Dollar Book Club members were enjoying
exactly the same book—for only 990! • • •
Or, as another example, here is a passage from a direct mail
piece selling a Fuel Reclaimer—a device for the engine of your
car that feeds escaping crankcase gases back into your carburetor:
. . . This device uses the suction-power of your own
motor to scoop up that smoke. And then—in one of the most
brilliant ideas in engineering history—it destroys that smoke

92

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

by feeding it back into your engine, where it is burned up
again as a continuous, extra flow of fuel!
Think of it! Instead of polluted oil, polluted engine,
polluted air—vou get a constant stream of extra gasoline
flowing into your engine, almost as though vou had a free,
second gas tank connected to vour car!
Instead of one breakdown after another, one more
repair bill after another, each more expensive than before
you get young-car power, young-car economy, voung-car
resistance to repair bills, because the deadlv sludge-causers,
acid-causers, filth-causers that used to ruin vour car, are
now being burned up as fuel in vour engine!. . , .

Picture the Black Side, Too
9. And there's no need to neglect the Heaven-Or-Hell approach. Here the negative aspect to every promise—the problem
that you are liberating your prospect from forever—is painted in
all its full black color. You irritate the wound, and then you apply
the salve that heals it.
Thus you derive two currents of motivation—repulsion away
from the former problem or inadequate product, and the attraction generated by your own product's contrasting solutions.
There are several forms in which vou can present this beforeand-after picture. You can do it through narration or the testimonial. You can do it by using the "pitch" technique of product
ridicule. Or you can simply present straight description of the
old product or problem, with all its detailed drawbacks, and then
follow it directly with a similar description of vour new solution
in a perfectly parallel style, item by item. Here, as an example,
is a passage from an ad selling a new kind of spark plug:
. . . Someday, if you ever have a spare moment, lift
one of the old-fashioned spark plugs out of vour car! Look
at the bottom of that plug. In 10 seconds, vou'II learn more
about gas waste than any book could teach vou in a vear!
If that plug has been in your car three thousand miles
or more, then what you'll see on the bottom of that plug

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

is FILTH! The Firing Point of that plug—the most important single point in vour car—will be choked, strangled
and fouled with BLACK, FILTHY CARBON! Carbon that
robs vour car of as much as 20 vital horsepower everytime
vour engine fires!
Now, wipe that filth awav and look at the Firing Point
itself. This is the POWER POINT of your car . . . the pinhead of electricitv that turns raw gas into 300 horsepower
of driving energy! And what is the condition of that point?
CORRODED—PITTED—SCARRED—-AND
WORN!
Hardlv able to deliver half the spark that it should! Wasting gas—wasting monev evervtime vou put vour foot down
on the gas pedal!
Yes! You pay $2,000—83.000—84.000 for your car. And'
a single 99c part robs vou of the real power and enjovment of that car.
AT LAST! A PLUG SO SMART THAT IT THINKS"!
Now look at the new plug—the re\ olutionarv Power
Flash plug that I'll send vou—for exactlv the same price
that you're paving today.
Here is a plug that has not onlv ONE firing point—
but hundreds of potential firing points! That actuallv ELIMINATES THAT DEADLY CARBON—burns it up—throws
it awav—KEEPS ITSELF SPARKLING CLEAN ON
EVERY SINGLE STROKE! The full, blazing horsepower
that was there when vour car was brand-new, is still there
as much as 30.000 miles later.
But that's just the beginning! This plug actually gives
vou the full firing power vou need for everv driving condition—smooth, dependable power for city stop-and-go
driving—effortless horsepower for the parkway—blazing reserve power for super speeds. . . .
And that's still just the beginning! Best of all. this is
one of the toughest, strongest, longest-lasting plugs ever
made. You could actuallv pound it against a concrete wall
with a hammer without even denting it—and this amazing
plug would still fire clean and hot with 30,000 miles! Yes!
These fantastic plugs give vou such consistent, long-lasting
service that we can afford to make one of the most amazing guarantees vou have ever heard. . . .

93

94

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I O N

Show H o w Easy It Is to Get These Benefits
10. To repeat again, the variations are limitless. At everv
point that your product touches the life of vour prospect price,
availability, ease of use, durability, portability replacement and
maintenance, even unwrapping the carton it comes in—it furnishes you with another fresh perspective in which to reiterate
and reemphasize its benefits. Here is just one example—stressing the ease of application, and contrasting it with the tremendous benefits that that application gives you:
. . . One week from today, vou are going down to your
car. You are going to lift up its hood—vou are going to take
the black, shining can we send you—and vou are going to
simply pour its contents into the oil filler pipe of vour car!
that's all the work you will do! That's all the skill vou
need! And yet in that 30 seconds work, vou will improve
that cars performance in eight different wavs!
With just 30 seconds work, you will strengthen the
engine of that car so greatly that you will get 2 to 3 to 5
miles more per gallon from every gallon vou buv. . .
With just 30 seconds work, you will lubricate that engine so thoroughly that you will drive up to 5.000 full miles
without even looking at vour oil. . .
And, with just 30 seconds work, you will protect that
engine so completely that you will add up to four years to
its power and life! . . . You will push off the ring and piston jobs that might cost you $75 each—for vears!.

Use Metaphor, Analogy, Imagination
11. Nor do you have to be satisfied merely with the statement
of rate fact. There are infinite opportunities for the use of imagination to present those facts in more dramatic form, outside of
the rigidly realistic approach. Some of the more famous examples
are the Alexander Hamilton ad of the Twenties, "The Glory of
the Upward Path." Or the Big Ben alarm clock series, "First he
whispers, then he shouts." Or this passage from perhaps the most

FIRST TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION'

95

long-lived ad of them all, the Shenvin Cody English Course, in
which a manual of instruction is personified and given actual
life:
The basic principle of Mr. Cody's new method is
habit-forming. Anyone can learn to write and speak correctly bv constantly using the correct forms. But how is
one to know in each case which is correct? Mr. Cod}' solves
this problem in a simple, unique, sensible way.
100% Self-Correcting Device.
Suppose he himself were standing forever at your
elbow. Every time you mispronounced or misspelled a word,
every time you violated correct grammatical usage, every
time vou used the wrong word to express what you meant,
suppose vou could hear him whisper. "That is wrong, it
should be thus and so." In a short time you would habitually use the correct form and the right words in speaking
and writing.
If vou continued to make the same mistakes over and
over again, each time patiently he would tell you what was
right. He would, as it were, be an everlasting mentor beside vou—a mentor who would not laugh at you, but who
would, on the contrary, support and help you. This 100%
Self-Correcting Device does exactly this thing. It is Mr.
Cody's silent voice behind you, reach' to speak out whenever vou commit an error. It finds your mistakes and concentrates on them. You do not need to study anything you
alreadv know. There are no rules to memorize. . . .
Before You're D o n e , Summarize
12. To repeat again, there is an infinite number oi new approaches. No list of them can ever be complete, because new
applications, new perspectives, new viewpoints are being discovered every day.
Which of them, and how many of them you will use in a
single ad, is a matter of timing and balance as you begin to put
your ad together. As long as each additional fresh perspective continues to huild the dominant desire in your prospect's mind, use it.

96

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

But if the additional perspective is not different or dramatic enough
to renew your prospect's interest in your claims, then leave it out.
To a large degree, this is a matter of sensitivity and originality on
your part. The sensitivity comes from intuition and experience; the
originality often comes from nothing more than hard work. And
perhaps the best way to measure the balance between the two—
that critical turning point where reinforcement becomes mere repetition—is to re-read your ad, some davs after vou have first written it.
There are, however, two conventional summary devices
which are almost always used, and which must be mentioned
here.
The first of these is the "catalog." This is a brief condensed
listing of all the product's performances, benefits, and/or applications, one after the other, without description, dramatization or
elaboration. Each of the benefits or perspectives which might
have been given three or four paragraphs at the beginning of
your ad, is here summed up in a single line.
There are two types of catalogs. Those that expand desire
horizontally, among ever-enlargening groups of applications or
prospects. And those that expand desire vertically bv deepening
or magnifying that desire.
Here is an example of the first type of catalog—used to list
all the applications of a blow torch kit that might conceivably sell
it to a home owner:
ALL IN ONE!
Blow-Torch, Paint-Remover, Soldering Iron!
Professional-hpe Propane Torch also doubles as fast,
safe Paint Remover and precision Soldering Iron! Does 101
jobs around the house, including—
Laving tile; removing paint or putt}'; thawing frozen
pipes; sweating copper tubing; soldering gutters; repairing
electrical work; starting charcoal fires and fireplaces: burning weeds, parasites and damp leaves; thawing frozen locks;
light brazing; loosening rusty bolts; car body and fender

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: INTENSIFICATION

97

repairs; soldering aluminum, silver and jewelry and other
hobbies, and manv, manv more. . . .
It is quite obvious, of course, that this catalog device uses
the "shotgun approach." Up to this point, vour ad has taken a
single dominant desire, and developed that single desire to the
point of absolute maximum intensity. This willingness to gamble
on being precisely right—on having chosen the one most powerful appeal—gives your ad the impact of a high-velocity rifle.
But it also demands the accuracy of an expert marksman.
Now—through this multi-appeal catalog listing—vou have a
last-minute chance to hedge. Now vou "shotgun" with every wideangled appeal, benefit and application in the book. Before vou
were heightening a single desire, bv picturing the satisfaction of
that desire in a dozen different settings.
Now you are building an effect of a different kind—one of
sheer magnitude, of number, of infinite possibilities—in the hope
that any one of them, or the combination of all of them working
together, mav provide the extra added push that closes the sale.
This catalog technique was born in mail order book selling,
and here it has its widest application. This next example is a continuation of the memory book ad we quoted above:
. . . But this is just the beginning of the "miracles" vou
can perform with vour memory. This secret is just one of
the over 50 MEMORY INTENSIFIERS contained in this
book...
For instance—REMEMBERING NAMES AND
FACES! . . . How would vou like to walk into a room of
twenty new people—meet each one of them onlv once—
and then remember their names, automatically, for as long
as vou live . . .
Think of the advantage in business, when vou can call
every customer bv his first name, and then ask for his wife
and children, instantly, by their first names! Think of the
impression you'll make when you ask him about the state
of his business, his hobbies, when vou repeat, almost word
for word, the last conversation vou had with him. Think of

98

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

becoming the celebrity at your club—as the member who
"knows everyone"—who can be depended on to avoid mistakes, to win new friends for the organization, to get things
done!
But this is still just the beginning! This book teaches
you to remember exactly what you hear and read! . . . It
teaches you how to memorize a speech or a sales presentation. in minutes! It teaches vou how to remember every
card played when you relax at night! . . . It shows vou how
to improve the depth and force and power of vour mind!
How to double your vocabulary—learn dozens of wavs to
burn new words into your memory—learn their meanings
without looking them up—repeat entire phrases, sentences,
paragraphs from the great writers! You'll be able to learn
a foreign language in a few short weeks—at least three to
four times as quickly and easily as vou could without this
system! You'll be able to hear a joke, storv or anecdote onlv
once, and then repeat it in the same hilarious wav!
Yes! And most important of all, this book will show
you how to professionally organize vour mind—do what vou
have to do in half the time! You'll remember dates, addresses, appointments—automatically! You'll carry dozens
of telephone numbers in the file-cabinet of \our mind! . . .
Let me send you this book, and prove these facts to vou
in one short evening, or it doesn't cost vou a penny! . . .

The second use for this catalog technique is to pile desire
upon desire, rather than application upon application. It is again
a building of magnitude, of number—but this time in summary
of all the perspectives that have gone before. This example is taken
from the Fish Lure ad quoted above:
. . . Here's What This Amazing, Self-Propelled Fish
Lure Does For You!
First of all, this Self-Propelled Fish Lure frees vou
forever from the filthy task of digging for worms and
crawlers, catching frogs, or paying 500 to $1 for a bucket
of minnows that die on you before vou can even get them
in the boat! It frees you forever from paving $3, 84 or even
85 for a fancy, "dead-as-a-duck" lure that onlv works when

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

99

vou tow it—that could never actually swim under its own
power behind vou!
It frees vou forever from long, torturous hours of careful work, tving your own flies and lures, because you just
couldn't buy anything, anywhere, that would reach out bevond vour farthest casts, and pull in the fish for you!
It means that tomorrow . . . you can go out in fresh or
jalt
water
. . . and haul in the -eye-poppers with a lure that
s
actuallv drives them into a frenzy with its crippled minnow action and its dying bee sound! It means that you can
weigh down vour boat with bigmouthed bass, small mouthed
bass, cat-fish, dog-fish . . . wherever you drop a line!
It means that you can fish better—novice or p r o sound asleep at the bottom of your boat—than most fishermen sweating and casting till their arms ache with ordinary, "dead-as-a-duck" lures!
And it means that you'll have the time of your life—
not only amazing your friends and family with the hauls
vou drag home behind you—but just watching your fisherman friends' faces, the first time they see this incredible
SELF-PROPELLED FISH LURE in action! Their eves
will almost pop out of their heads!. . . .
Put Your Guarantee to Work
13. And finally, as you close the sale, as you ask the prospect
for action, as you state the terms of your guarantee, you can turn
that guarantee into the climax of your ad—the last brief summary of your product's performances—reinforced at every step
by the positive reassertion of that guarantee. Here is an example
from the spark plug ad quoted above:
. . . Guaranteed For Two Full Years!
Yes! You try these amazing POWER FLASH SPARK
PLUGS for two full years entirely at our risk! First, test
them for one full month for surging power, thrilling new
driving performance, breath-taking gas-savings alone! D uring that very first month alone
1. These plugs must give you up to 9 miles more per
gallon instantly—or your full purchase price back!

100

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

2. These plugs must give vou up to 31 more horsepower instantly—or your full purchase price back!
3. As an extra added assurance—these plugs must continue to give vou this power, performance and gas savings
FOR TWO FULL YEARS —or we will send vou a brandnew set ABSOLUTELY FREE! . . .
Or, as an even better example of the full impact vou can
gain by using your guarantee as a summarv device, here is the
guarantee passage from the plant food ad quoted above:
. . . These Magic English Pellets . . . cost onlv S2.98 for
a package of 144 pellets . . . Since onlv one or two pellets
are required to treat the average plant, this is an investment of only a few pennies a plant for the most astounding beautv vou have ever seen!
And these results are completelv guaranteed! Here is
what we ask you to do, when vou receive vour Magic Pellets next week—
USE THEM TO CREATE SUPER-FLOYYERS! Place
one tiny pellet besides each of your hvdrangeas. zinneas . . .
any kind of flower that you want super-blooms! And if vou
don't see fantastic new growth within a few short weeks . . .
ii you don't watch with amazement while handfuls of new
blossoms burst forth from these old plants—then simplv return the emptv package for everv cent of vour monev back!
USE THEM TO CREATE SUPER-VEGETABLES!
And pick huge, breath-taking beauties within a few short
weeks . . . thrill your family with the sweetest, juiciest, tenderest vegetables you've ever known—or everv cent of vour
money back!
YES! USE THEM IN YOUR ENTIRE GARDEN!
Use them on hard-luck plants where vou've almost given
up hope! Use them on the hardest-to-grow house plants
that you know! Yes, even use them in sand, and absolutely
astound your friends! And if you don't agree that this British
invention is a true gardening miracle . . . if vour garden isn't
the showplace of your neighborhood at the end of one short
month—then simply return the empty package—for evencent of vour money back!. . . .

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

101

At the end of vour ad as well as at its beginning—Intensification—building desire by presenting continually new images of
its satisfaction through your product. The first of the Processes
of Persuasion.
How to Apply These Principles of
Intensification to the Campaign
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, we have used
predominantly mail order examples to illustrate the mechanism
of Intensification. We have done this for two reasons. First, because mail order customarilv uses long copv and hyperbole; and
it is through the extremes ol this long copv and these superlatives that we can see these techniques working most clearly.
Secondly, we have used mail order for these examples because mail order says all it has to sav about a product in a single
ad. There are no mail order "campaigns," in the sense of a series of different-though-related advertisements, appearing one
after the other, and based on a common theme. Mail order compresses such a campaign into a single ad. It savs all it can, everything it can think of, in this one ad (which is often laboriously
fitted together out of a series of preliminary ads, each of which
contributes some element to the finished form). And then, when
it has proven itself successful, it is frozen—even to the point of
typography—and run until it has exhausted its potential.
Thus, mail order as a rule contains the greatest number of
these Intensification devices in a single ad; and bv studying these
mail order ads we can see them working against each other, complementing each other, reinforcing each other, strengthening the
overall effect as paragraph is piled on paragraph.
But in national advertising, the rules change. While mail
order is a series of introductions of new products, the average
life of which is less than two years, national advertising is concerned with products whose life span is far greater, often approaching the entire life span of advertising itself. And while the

WZ

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

mail order advertisement runs once, and then is not repeated for
three to six months, national advertising must keep its product
image constantly in front of its public, and therefore must run
far more frequently.
Thus, national advertising, by its frequent insertions, soon
loses its immediate novelty. The creative problem in national advertising thus changes from finding the theme for a particular advertisement to finding the theme for a series of advertisements.
And the problem of Intensification shifts from building desire
throughout the advertisement to building desire throughout the
series. And an entirely new problem of balance emerges—that
of keeping continuity throughout the series, hy maintaining the
dominant image sharp enough and identifiable enough to utilize
the desire generated hy past advertisements, and at the same time
varying that image sufficiently to induce the prospect to read it
again, and therefore reinforce and sharpen that desire.
Assuming that you have found your dominant image, vour
creative problem now becomes two-fold. First, to compress that
image into a single statement or picture, so powerful that it will
sell the product the very first time it is used, and so true to the
heart of your market that it will continue to sell that product,
even when it is used over and over again.
It is important to realize that—as the campaign develops—
this dominant image or idea cannot remain as the headline. To
present the same basic headline (or lead picture) time after time
to the same audience would soon make the campaign unreadable
This leads us to your second creative problem. To present a
series of variations or perspectives of that central image—each
emerging from your dominant idea, but each so different from
the rest that they impel your prospect to read through them, and
so fresh that they make that dominant idea seem new again.
Thus you have your Central Campaign Idea, and its continuous restatement in a series of fresh disguises
There are as many different ways to use this basic technique
of campaign construction as there are advertising styles. They

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I O N

103

range from the most blatant and obvious to the most subtle. To
start at the top, in a brief resume of examples, consider the
superbly-effective Colgate campaign of the late 1950s. Here the
centra] idea was openly stated, and precisely repeated, during
every advertisement:
"Gardol—the Invisible Shield that Protects Your Teeth."
The variations consisted of a scries of opening analogies.
Using television as the most sharplv-deflned example, an invisible shield was shown protecting the announcer against baseballs,
footballs, etc.—against which thev would simply bounce off. The
wording of the commercials was ritualistic. Once the initial demonstration was over, there was no variation in the sentences that
followed:
"Just as this invisible shield (the announcer raps the
shield with his knuckles) protects me against this baseball,
so the invisible shield in Colgate toothpaste protects your
teeth against decay."
Here the variations are confined to the opening demonstration in the first ten seconds of the commercial. These are
designed to startle the viewer (the ball being thrown directly at
him from within the television set) and this emotional reaction
is carried over to reinforce the rigidlv repeated remainder of the
commercial. Thus vou have a quick and startling emotional involvement, welded onto a precise selling message.
Equallv as powerful is the technique of repeating the exact
verbal image throughout a series of advertisements, while varying and freshening the emotional appeal through a spectrum ol
constantly changing main illustrations. Thus the dominant image
is retained intact—continuity is maintained—but there is no feeling of over-familiarity or boredom. This technique might be named
"Rule and Example." Two of its most effective uses recently have
been in the hair styling field. First with Toni, where the preciselyrepeated verbal image was:

104

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: INTENSIFICATION

"WHICH TWIN HAS THE TONI—and which has
the $15 permanent?"
Above this unvarying headline was a continuouslv-changing
stream of pretty girls—each new picture making the question new
again, and requiring an interplay of examination between the picture and the copy to discover the answer.
The same technique was used, some vears later, bv Clairol
to sell their hair tint. Here the Rule was expressed in the preeiselvrepeated headline:
"DOES SHE OR DOESN'T SHE 0
"Hair-coloring so natural only her hairdresser knows
for sure."
Here again, this headline was re-invigorated bv a series of
main illustrations, of attractive young women, in common but
glamorized every-day activities, enjoying their lives. Here again.
the Examples not only proved the Rule, but renewed it.
At the other extreme, however, the dominant image mav not
even appear in the advertisements themselves, but mav merelv
be the underlying theme for the campaign as a whole. Here the
continuity is retained—not by a precisely-repeated slogan or statement—but by a single, rigidly-maintained focal point. This focal
point may be a dominant product appeal—such as the Cadillac
quality7, which is symbolized in every Cadillac advertisement in
the identification background photography, in the typography, in
the copy style, in the fashions and jewelry that are chosen to appear with the car, and the credit lines that are given to them—
even to the highly-stylized pen-and-ink drawings that are used
when the campaign shifts to newspapers.
Or, if it so merits, the focal point may be simply the product itself. In such a campaign, each succeeding advertisement
reveals another fact about the product. Each is completely different; no single phrase or slogan is repeated twice. Here trie variations comprise the entire verbal content of the advertisements. But

FIRST T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: INTENSIFICATION

105

their subject-matter, and the illustrations, are alwavs the same—
the product.
Perhaps the best example of this technique is the magnificent Volkswagen magazine campaign. Here the advertisements
are reduced to severe simplicity. There is no background identification whatsoever. Different perspectives of the product are
shown as close-up as possible (except in the "Think Small" advertisement) against an absolutely bare background.
Against this rigid focus on the car itself, to the exclusion of
every other visual element, the series of copv messages presents
a complete exploration of even facet of the car's performance,
utility, economy, durability service facilities and what-have-vou.
Any single advertisement is sufficient to interest a prospective
buyer. Together, especially when concentrated in the same media
and reaching the same audience week after week, the series builds
an overwhelming impression of novelty and value—the theme of
an Honest Car. Here, as examples, are only a few of the dozens
of different headlines:
"THINK SMALL."
(The first in the series, discussing the merits of compactness
as an asset.)
"Lemon."
(Showing what appears to be a perfectly good car, and
discussing the microscopic, almost unnoticeable flaw in it that disqualified it.)
"Our new model."
(A car that shows no difference, but has dozens of essential
engineering changes inside the car, where thev won't make present models obsolete.)
"Why you should open the icindoio before you close the door
of a Volkswagen."
(Discussing the fact that the car is airtight, and the quality
that this fact symbolizes.)
"Our number one salesman."
(The serviceman, of course, hpifying the quality of care

106

F I R S T T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I N T E N S I F I C A T I O N

the VW owner gets, and combatting the conception that foreign cars give sparse service.)
And so on. A series of building-block advertisements, making no attempt to tell the complete storv in themselves, relying
on their ability to grasp the prospective buver and carrv him
through a procession of short, sharply focussed sales stories that
combine to give an informed desire of tremendous depth.
Notice, incidentally, that each of these headlines fulfills the
requirements necessary to place it at the top of an ad. Each of
them reaches out and touches the prospect at the point of his
dominant desire (to get more value for his car monev). Each expresses the common theme of the campaign (this is an honest
car). And each moves the prospect into the body copy—it gets
him to read the complete, though brief, selling message (The first
second, third and fifth headline do this through presenting the
reader with an apparent contradiction—in the first case, with his
accepted notion of "thinking big," and in the remaining advertisements, between the message of the headline and the content
of the photograph above it—thus compelling the reader to go
through the body copy to resolve the contradiction. The fourth
does it In- promising the reader information explaining an unusual and provocative request).
Notice also that to accomplish this noveltv-within-eontinuitv,
and to grasp the attention of the prospect oxer a series of advertisements, and to move him into the bodv copy where he can
be sold more thoroughly, each of these headlines takes the "Creative Gamble." The product, its trademark, or its performance is
not mentioned in the headline. The copy writer is taking the position that he can only sell adequately with the number of words
allowed him by the body copy. Therefore he is willing to risk his
headline in grasping the attention of his prospect and impelling
him to read on, into the sales message itself, presented in convincing detail below. If he fails in his gamble, he has wasted his
page. If he succeeds, he has doubled and tripled the effectiveness of his ad.

8
THE SECOND TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: IDENTIFICATION

How to Build a Saleable Personality Into Your Product
The desires, wants, needs and
cravings of mankind that we have just discussed are, above all,
obvious. The hungry man feels the contractions in his stomach:
the sick man feels his pain. The woman who is overweight feels
her embarrassment, her discomfort, her shame. The desire for
satisfaction, or for relief, displays itself openly. It announces both
its wants and its needs. It responds whole-heartedly and immediately to mechanisms that achieve its aims.
Therefore, the recognition and magnification of this desire is
the first and most obvious task of copy writing. All the principles
and techniques described in the last chapter were practiced to
perfection by the patent-medicine copy writers of the 1890's. Before the First World War, Claude Hopkins had lifted them out of
patent-medicine and established them in every category of general advertising. Until 1954, they literally dominated advertising.
107

108

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

But there is another kind of desire that exists in the human
mind—far more subtle, partly unconscious, longing not for satisfaction, but for expression. This second kind of desire is so different from the first, and operates under such different rules, that
it can justly be described as a second dimension of the human
mind. It ma}- be titled the Longing for Identification. Its rise to
prominence as a buying motive marks the great revolution in
merchandising of our time. Its utilization in copy writing—as an
adjunct to desire-building—constitutes our second Mechanism of
Persuasion . . . that of building the proper Identification into vour
product.

A Personal Note
Let me just inject a personal note here on the names I have
given these Techniques—or processes—I believe you should use
to cumulatively strengthen your copy. As I mention in the Introduction, I have never heard, or read, a discussion of mam- of
these techniques before. Therefore, they are not part of the common advertising terminology, and in case after case actually have
no names.
^ Because of this fact, I've had to invent names for them. Some
of these names convey their meaning at first glance, such as Intensification. Other names I've put together out of two or more
ordinary words, such as Gradaalization, to try to convey an idea
that has purposely been left ambiguous when you first encounter
it. And in still other cases, such as the Identification technique
discussed in this chapter, I've used terms you' already know and
stretched their meaning.
Identification here, for example, means more than the customer's process of identifying with a product personalitv, or even
with a group of prestige users of that product. Here, in this new
context I have given it, it means at the same time the active
process by which the copy writer capitalizes on this need for

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

109

identification by building its realization through his copv into his
product.
The stress is always, in all these techniques, on the word active. These are the activities vou must accomplish . . . the processes vou must utilize . . . the psychological effects vou must
achieve to give your copy the maximum possible strength. It is
this active, deliberate, ongoing process—this building of effects—
that I have tried to convey bv these terms.
The Roles Your Prospect Desires
What, exactly, is this process of Identification? Quite simply,
it is, first of all, the desire of your prospect to act out certain
roles in his life.
It is the desire of your prospect to define himself to the world
around him—to express the qualities within himself that he values, and the positions he has attained.
And how do you utilize this longing for identification when
you write your copy? In two ways: First, bv turning your product into an instrument for achieving these roles. And second, by
turning that product into an acknowledgement that these roles
have already been achieved.
Every product you work on should offer vour prospect two
separate and distinct reasons for buying it. First, it should offer
him the fulfillment of a physical want or need. This is the satisfaction your product gives him. And second, it should offer him
a particular method of fulfilling that need, that defines him to
the outside world as a particular kind of human being.
This is the role your product offers to vour prospect. It is
the non-functional, super-functional value of that product. And it
is built into that product—not bv engineering—but by merchandising alone.
For example, only the poor man today buvs food for its
physical satisfactions alone. The average American today selects

110

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

his food. Selects foods that he believes are modern, because he
wishes to be up-to-date. Selects foods that are non-fattening, because he wishes to be youthful and slim. Selects foods that come
from every country and reflect every taste on earth, because he
wishes to be cosmopolitan, adventurous and sophisticated.
This man no longer buys food for food alone. He has gained.
or he has been given, a whole new vocabulary of wants. He now
buys, not only objects, but roles. His life becomes devoted to a
quest for acknowledgements—"up-to-date" . . . "youthful"
"slim" . . . "cosmopolitan" . . . "adventurous" . . . and "sophisticated"
in this one instance alone.
And because of this multiplication of wants, this man gives
you hundreds of new ways to focus his attention, to stimulate his
desire, to build up that desire to the point of purchase. Evennew role that he covets—every new longing-for-identification that
he develops—gives you one more mass desire that you can harness to your product.
What are these roles? Where do they come from? How do
they operate? How do you put them to work for your product?
First of all—the roles themselves. There are two kinds. There
are roles that define character. And there are roles that express
achievement. Let's glance brieflv at each:
1. Character Roles
Usually expressed by adjectives, or adjectives-turned-nouns.
For instance—"progressive" . . . "chic" . . . "charming" . . . "brilliant" . . . "well-read." They are a part of the personality of vour
prospect. They belong to him. His task is to pick out the ones
he values most, and to develop them. And then to turn the spotlight of other people's attention onto them, one after the other.
Attainment of these character roles—masterv of them—is
not enough. Once they have been mastered, thev must then be
acknowledged, valued and admired, or thev are worthless.
Here again, your product can serve your prospect in three

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

111

distinct ways—beyond its physical satisfactions—in this constant
search for self-definition. First, it can help him achieve mastery
of his chosen character roles—such as a book on philosophy, if
he wishes to be thought of as well-read.
Second, it can help simplify condense or speed up this mastery—such as a Speed-Reading Course.
And third, and most important, it can serve as a symbol of
that mastery to invoke the acknowledgement or admiration of
his friends—such as a shelf to house both books.
You must realize that every one of these values goes far bevond the physical satisfactions of the products themselves. They
are supra-functional, and therefore add an extra incentive for purchase.
The book on philosophy might not have been purchased if
the prospect wished onlv to satisfy his academic curiosity, and
did not also wish to enlighten his friends in conversation. The
Speed-Reading Course might not have been purchased if the
prospect wished only to absorb more information in a shorter period of time, and did not also wish to use that information to get
ahead in both his business and social life. And certainly the bookshelves would not have been of the same fine quality-, finish and
luxury if the prospect had onlv wished to use them as a storehouse, and not also as a showpiece.
At least half of all purchases made today cannot he understood in terms of function alone. It would be absurd for a man
to spend $5,000 for a 150-mile-an-hour sports car for functional
reasons, when he onlv uses it to drive to and from work on congested, 35-mile-an-hour parkways. His willingness to spend this
money onlv becomes rational when vou take one further fact into
consideration—that this 150-mile-an-hour top speed, this handgear-shift, this fantastic cornering ability all give him as their
owner the role of "sportsman"—and very probably "successful
sportsman" at that.
Every product can benefit from this role-giving power. But
there are many products where this ability of character-reinforce-

112

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E OE BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

ment—whether built into that product by design, bv society or
by advertising—far outweighs in sales value the built-in performance of that product. In such products, it is the role-giving function that sells, and not the performance.
One further fact distinguishing these character roles. Since
they are not created by society but by the prospect himself, and
since they are almost never claimed openly but only hinted at.
implied and prompted, therefore they can never truly be tested
or measured, and they are ambiguous. They are subject to error.
And, more important, they are subject to fantasy.
Great areas of these character roles literally exist in the subconscious. They are never given definite words. They are not
stated or discussed, but subtly expressed in symbols and images.
Only rarely does the prospect even define them to himself. And
even more rarely does he test them against the outside world, to
see if they are actually true.
Therefore, your prospect is far more reach to believe in the
character roles you assign to him, than he is to believe in either
your product's performance claims, or the achievement roles it
may offer him. If the character role is flattering, such as "virility," and if it is subtly expressed in a non-verbal image-svmbol,
such as a test pilot smoking a cigarette, than the prospect can
easily persuade himself that the same action, smoking, performed
on the same product, the cigarette, conveys to him at least some
of the implied virility of the genuine possessor—in this case, the
pilot.
There is no direct claim made in the advertisement. No verbalization to be passed on by the conscious, rational mind. No
test situation called for where the prospect must prove that the
role is valid. Acceptance is easy painless, non-demanding.
This is not true of a performance claim, which must be justified in terms of concrete results to our friends. Nor is it true
of an achievement role, which must stand up to the harsh reality
of our position in everyday life. This superb ease-of-acceptance,
this consolation-without-cost feature of the character role is its

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

113

great ^trgrigth, and the reason why it should be used to supplement the verbal claims in every ad.
2. Achievement Roles
These are the status roles . . . class roles . . . position roles that
are created by every society on earth, and offered to the men
and women who can earn them. In a civilization as complex as
ours, there are literally hundreds of them—usually expressed bv
nouns, with the nouns serving as titles.
For example, for men, there are—"Executive" . . . "Home
Owner" . . . "$20,000-a-year-Man" . . . "Five Handicap" . . . "ManOn-His-Way-Up" . . . "Block Chairman" . . . and dozens more, embracing every activity of our lives.
For women, the primary achievement role to be won is "Wife,"
and from then on—"Fashion Setter" . . . "Career Woman" . . . "Good
Mother" . . . "Civic Leader" . . . "Power-Behind-the-Throne" . . .
"Patron of the Arts" . . . and on, and on.
The list, for both men and women, is endless. Each of these
roles is an achievement to be won, and held, and—most of all—
displayed.
Here display is vital—because none of these achievements
is obvious. Quite the opposite, they are immaterial and invisible—mere titles, roles, bundles of privilege. They do exist—thev
are real—and once they are gained, thev have great potential to
alter our lives. But that potential must first be translated into
physical symbols of success, for everyone around us to see.
And the easiest and most universally acknowledged symbols
of success in America today are the products we can buy. Products that are purchased—not by any stretch of the imagination
for their physical function alone—but for the definition they give
us as their possessors. In America today we are known—not only
by the company we keep—but by the products we own.
The most obvious example is the newly-wed woman. Her
first act in her new role as "Wife" is to receive a physical gift,

1 1 4

S E C O N D T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: IDENTIFICATION

which has absolutely no function other than to define her—the
wedding ring in which she is married. Weeks before this, she has
literally been shedding closets-full of clothes—clothes that still
fitted her physically, but not socially—in order to replace them
with a new material personality, her trousseau.
Her sheets and linens are new. Her furniture and carpeting
are new. Even the very roof over her head, todav, in our societv.
must be new. Because she is literally a new woman—her new
role has transformed her—and she must express that transformation in everything she owns.
The same principle applies to every aspect of all of our lives.
Every social role that we achieve in life is immediately translated
into those possessions which we believe express that position most
clearly. And as we acquire these possessions throughout our life.
what we are doing is constructing for ourselves a "material personality," that we carry with us wherever we go, and whose function it is to define us, instantly, to whomever we meet.
The "Man-On-His-Way-Up," for example, trades in his Ford
for a Buick, and, when he becomes an "Executive," trades in his
Buick for a Cadillac. The "Career Woman" needs an entirelv
different wardrobe than the one she owned as a "Housewife."
And when the man of the house gets a raise, the house either
grows bigger, or prettier, or more filled with status-definers of
every description—or the house itself is discarded, to be replaced
by one more befitting the new character of its possessor.
How to Put These Longings for Identification
to Work for Your Product
Thus products become more than products. In addition to
their physical functions, they take on new immaterial functions
as status definers. They announce our achievements, define our
role in life, document our success.
All products may benefit from this power to define. But in
particular, when you have a product that does the same job as its

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

115

competitors, and is so priced that price is no longer a factor, then
the prospect's choice will almost overwhelmingly depend on the
difference in role that your product offers him. And it is vour job
to create this role for him in your ad.
The performance of this job—the process of building these
character and achievement roles into vour product, to be used
bv vour prospect—is the process of Identification, our second
mechanism of persuasion.
And just as the wish for this identification by vour prospect
is a special form of desire—the desire, not for satisfaction, but
for recognition—so the method vou use to put it to work for your
product follows exactly the same pattern of discovery and magnification that you would use for anv other desire.
First, your job is to discover exactly what kinds of character
and achievement roles vour prospect is readv to identify with
vour product—what kind of roles he will reject for that product—and which of the accepted roles is the most compelling.
And then you must present those chosen roles in such a wav—
so vividly and so intensely—that the role vou are projecting will
become virtually irresistible.
Once again, it is vour market itself that presents vou with
both your opportunities and vour limitations. And it is vour own
personal skill as a copy writer that determines how effectively
vou side-step those limitations, and how fullv you realize the potential of vour opportunities.
First of all—the limitations. Above everything else, of course,
you cannot force your market to accept an unrealistic identification. People assign certain characteristics to certain products.
These characteristics may arise out of the product itself—its structure or performance, its historv, its cost to produce or sell. Or
thev may stem from the role or roles that it plavs in their lives
today—or that similar products play in their lives—or that these
products plav in the lives of other people, whom thev have seen,
heard or read about.
These characteristics may be true or false, superficial or

116

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

profound, flattering or libelous. But as far as your product is concerned, they are as hard as rock—and just as determinative. They
exist. They are facts. They cannot be changed. If vou try to break
through them and establish a contradictory image, vou will learn
that they form the walls of a prison.
But if you decide to build on to them—to use them as a foundation for sharper, coordinated images, which may be even broader
and more appealing—then, if necessary, you can turn those apparent limitations into the strongest selling points in your ad.
Not every product needs this technique, of course. Speaking in terms of identification potential, there are two kinds of
products. One is the product with built-in prestige—the sports
car, the swimming pool, the diamond bracelet. These rare and
expensive products already embody the identification appeals most
Americans want. They actually symbolize these appeals success,
achievement, adventure, self-indulgence, exclusivity—so unquestionably that they can be used to weld these same values onto
other products.
But these other products—by far the overwhelming majority of the products you will be given to work with—have no such
built-in prestige. It is up to you to create their prestige for them.
And you must do this by building on the characteristics they already possess—by using these accepted characteristics as a
bridge—between the product. . . the image it already has . . . and
the prestige-filled image that you want to wind up \vith.
We now have all the tools we need to build identification
values for our product. We realize that identification longings
are a separate and immensely powerful form of desire—a desire, not for physical satisfaction, but for expression and recognition.
These longings for identification are two-fold. We all wish to
express our character, and we all wish to gain recognition for our
accomplishments.
But we cannot do this openly—verbally. We cannot go around
boasting how virile we are, or how rich we are. So we svmbolize

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

117

these prestige claims. We express them in terms ol products—
and we buy products that express them.
As Americans, living in our culture and our century, there
are certain character roles and certain achievement roles that we
value more than others. The most general and compelling of these
are: the wish to be virile or feminine—the wish to be exciting,
unique, fun-filled and adventurous—the wish to be friendly and
well-liked—the wish to be important, influential and correct—
the wish to be modern and up-to-date—and. above all, the wish
to be successful, to make something of our lives.
These are the roles most Americans buv. In some splinter
markets, other, contradictory roles mav apply. But, in the mass,
these are the characteristics that will turn the prospects from one
brand to another.
The Primary Image of Your Product
There is a critical point that separates the process of building identification from the process of building desire, namely, that
the product you are given has its men personality at the moment
you are given it. It has its own characteristics. And these characteristics may contradict what most Americans want—or simply
not include them—or simply not include as many of them as you
want.
For example, a cigarette is not, by itself, a symbol of success.
But vou realize that if you could make it a symbol of success, you
could sell many more of them. Nor is a piston ring, by itself, a
svmbol of virility—even though that virility image, if vou could
create it, would sell manv more piston rings. And, though household appliances are not, at first glance, symbols of femininity,
women would buv manv more of them if thev could somehow be
made feminine.
How do you do this? In two steps—the first of which is to
identify the primary image that each of these products already
has in the mind of your prospects. For instance, a cigarette is

118

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

virile in almost everyone's mind. And a piston ring is precisionmachined and full of mechanical beauty to almost every man.
And household appliances are time-saving, by virtue of tlie ven
functions they perform.
These are the primary images of the products vou are called
on to sell. These are the accepted images that thev alreadv have
in your prospect's mind. Your job now is to use 'these alreadvaccepted images as raw material, as a starting point to construct
new, double, triple and quadruple images, that draw in more of
these most-wanted roles into your product-personality, and multiply its identification appeal.
You do this in two wavs:
First, by changing the intensity of your primary image. Bv
emphasizing and dramatizing that primary image, if it is alreadv
acceptable. Or by toning it down, if it is negative or neutral.
For example, the male virility naturally associated witli
cigarettes is a definite sales aid, even with women. The sheer
physical act of smoking—of "playing with fire"—of "breathing
fire"—has been for centuries an assertion of manhood and of
daring.
But Marlboro took this image of virilitv- and intensified i t deepened it—in three ways. First, they presented men who were.
in themselves, virile. Second, they presented these men in situations or occupations that demand virility. And third, thev took the
further "Creative Gamble" of affixing to these men's hands one of
the most primitive symbols of virilitv- known to history—the tattoo.
A single dominant emotion—virilitv-—symbolized three ways.
The impact of repetition reinforced through variation. Far more
powerful—far more eye-catching—far more appealing than anyone of these images could have been by itself.
So far, there has been no difference between this technique
and the intensification of desire we discussed previously. Although we are speaking here in visual terms, the mechanics are
exactly the same—the intensification of an already-existing emo-

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

119

tion in your prospect, through a series of reinforcing images expressing the fulfillment of that emotion.
With certain, naturally-favored products, this process of intensification may be all that is required—though even Marlboro,
as mentioned below, goes beyond it. But—and this point is imperative—though the process of intensifying desire for your product ends here, the process of building the proper identification
for your product—of building prestige for that product—only- begins here.
For the primary image of vour product may not be favorable. It may be negative—contradicting the roles most people
want to play. Or it may simply be neutral—a wallflower product—offering most people no emotional reaction at all.
In both these cases, your first suggestion may be to simply
discard these primary images altogether, and substitute more favorable ones. This has been done in countless advertisements.
And it doesn't work—for a very simple reason. Because people
just won't believe that a product is what it isn't. You cannot contradict accepted images or beliefs in advertising. This is not advertising's role. Nor is it really necessary.
In order to overcome these unfavorable images, you simply
incorporate them in a larger, overall image—lower their emotional intensity—and use them as readily-accepted bridges to lead
your prospect into far more compelling appeals.
How to Build New Images Into Your Product
This is a single process, but it is made up of two steps. First,
as mentioned above, a change in the intensity of your primaryimage—in this case, subordinating it even though you retain it.
And second, using it as a logical link to bring in any number of
more favorable images.
One of the most striking examples is the Chesterfield ad
of 1926—"Blow Some My Wax"—fully examined in Chapter 3.

120

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: IDENTIFICATION

Here is pure identification advertising—dealing with an unfavorable image of two generations' standing—that cigarettes are
a "man's product." Although the objective of the campaign was
to make smoking, and smoking situations, more acceptable to
women, it would have been impossible to do this bv picturing
the woman alone. The idea that women would practice this Masculine act in private, or with each other, was inadmissible. Therefore the man must be retained. The accepted image must be
acknowledged.
But he undergoes two vital transformations. First, he is subdued. His figure is darkened, almost blended into invisibility with
the background. And his position in the picture—his posture—
the arrangement of his hands and face as the light plavs over
them—all direct the attention of the viewer past the man himself and into the focal point of the picture, the woman sitting beside him.
Thus he becomes a mere suggestion of man, leading the
viewer into a far more appealing overall image—that of a handsome young couple, alone together on a moonlit beach, heightened emotionally with the carefully-blended-in suggestions of
escape, intimacy, and a sense of shared daring.
Because the primary image is there—because the smoking
is done by the man—the viewer, even a well-brought up woman
of the 1920s, accepts the situation. But this acceptance, once
established, goes far beyond that primary image. This feminine
viewer is also willing to accept the romance of the overall scene—
including its emotional undertones of escape from the conventional rules and boundaries, and its feelings of relaxation and
liberty. She is now willing to project herself into this scene.
And in accepting the scene as a whole, she is finally led to
accepting the climactic words, "Blow some mv way," as being a
perfectly natural and acceptable action for her to take, with all
its implications for her conduct in the future.
This, then, is the process of identification—of building prestige for your product. To weave favorable social and character

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

121

images into the personality of your product, in order to reinforce
and even dominate those primary images that your product already has.
There is onlv one limit to the number, or the range of favorable images that vou can add to that product personality. Simply that you must always include the primary image as their base.
They must emerge from that primary image, and thev must be
logically consistent with its broadest definition.
For example, to return to Marlboro, once vou have developed the primary image to its peak of intensity then there is absolutely nothing to stop vou from weaving other powerful appeals
into this base. Connotations of success can be included bv the
model's clothes, such as the tuxedo worn in the first ads, or bv
the possessions he holds. Adventure and excitement can be suggested by the situation you picture him in, such as on a boat, in
a plane, riding horseback, etc. Romance bv a voung girl, mvsterv
and affairs of great importance bv a dark background or a briefcase, culture and intellectual achievement bv a rare book or an
antique telescope.
As a matter of fact, many visual symbols, bv themselves, communicate several different roles of great appeal at the same time.
For example, the single image of ownership of a fine painting
mav express, not only success, but also cultural breeding and intellectual accomplishment.
Such multi-image symbols perform two vital tasks for vour
product. They broaden the size of its market bv grafting on new
emotional appeals—social and character identifications that reach
into the fringe areas of that market—that intrigue people who
would not be sufficiently swaved bv the pure functional values
of your product. And second, bv adding in these manv-sided emotional images, thev deepen and intensify the emotional attraction
felt for your product bv all the men and women who make up
that market.
Perhaps this can best be shown bv taking a hypothetical
example, of a product with strictly neutral primary images, and

122

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

developing, and weaving together, a network of far stronger
emotional images for it.
Let's start with piston rings, and assume that a new tvpe of
piston ring has just been developed, that lasts longer and therefore saves oil and gas. Our body copy, of course, develops this
saving theme. We have exploited the functional advantages of
the product as far as possible. We are now ready to reinforce
these benefits by expanding the product's social and character
appeals.
We start by taking inventory. We have a prodiret—piston
rings. It has only a few primary images—mechanical, precisionmade, unseen. Nothing exciting here. It also has a primary situation—replacement, and always by a mechanic, and usually onlv
when there's trouble.
These primary images are either neutral or negative. But
they're all we have to work with. They, and they alone, must form
the foundation, must set the direction, for every other appeal we
bring into the over-all image we are constructing.
So we know that we must deal with the act of replacement,
and that the replacement must be done by a mechanic. These
are our limitations—but once we observe them, we turn them into
the starting point for the true emotional message ice want to
broadcast through our ad. We take each of these primary elements, and glamorize, dramatize and emotionalize them to the
brink.
The car itself—what kind of car shall it be? Certainly not a
beat-up family sedan. Why not a Mercedes SL-300—a $12,000
sports car with its distinctive grill-work sides, and all the emotional extras of power, speed, skill-in-handling, plus sophistication, success and downright excitement.
Now the garage—what should it look like? A sports-car shop,
of course. Neat, clean, precise. With high-power equipment
gleaming chrome and steel—hanging on the walls, ready on the
shelves, being installed on other sports models in the background.
The mechanic is not young, not old, simply mature. Rugged,

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

123

knowledgeable, precise. He's sure of what he's doing—there isn't
a wasted motion or a wasted tool anywhere about him.
The owner of the car is young, wiry, yirile, but he too has
been around. (Put into words, these images must take on a measure of disbelief, which we express by saying they're "corny."
However, expressed in visual terms, where they can be symbolized, and therefore implied rather than named, they enter into
our minds unnoticed, and we accept them without question. Verbal terms—words and sentences—can be used to imply images
of identification; but these are different tvpes of images, and must
be conveyed in a different way. We will touch on this verbal
image building again, as related to excitement and mood, in Chapter 14.
The owner is not a professional driver, but he races the car
for sport (we know this bv the roll-over bar over the back of the
seats). He loves this car (its perfect shine, its gleaming chrome
engine, its complete absence of even a spot of dirt). He too is
precise (the chronometer on his wrist). And he carries his success with a complete casualness (the absence of anv special driving outfit—just slacks and a sport shirt).
And what about the relationship between the two men?
Knowledge complementing skill. The expert in one field advising
the expert in another. Comfort, understanding, teamwork—leading to mutual achievement.
And what are thev doing? Replacing rings, of course. But
not because the old rings have developed trouble (nothing in this
car would be left unchecked long enough to have developed a
flaw). But because this mechanic is installing these new rings in
this car as high-performance equipment, exactly as he would install a supercharger to increase its horsepower.
Everything about the picture—its camera angle, its composition, its lighting, the angle of the men's heads and arms as thev
examine the rings—develops the emotion of precision and the
excitement and drama of discovering new performance through
greater and greater precision.

124

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: IDENTIFICATION

It is a picture, a situation and a mood that invites participation. The reader may not notice every emotional detail that
you have developed; but he will sense the excitement and pleasure that you have built up. He will wish to share in this world.
And he will buy the product that gives him this world—that offers it as a bonus to all its functional and physical satisfactions.
On the Limits to the Images Your
Prospects Will Identify With
I must insert a warning here. Although these identification images are immensely powerful when used correctly, there arc
also strict rules and limits to their use. And, if they are used incorrectly, they can be disastrous.
Many campaigns have collapsed because they have asked
their market to identify themselves with an unbelievable image.
For example, the deodorant-soap campaign of several vears ago
that used an elite, society image to sell the mass market. The
men and women who composed the market could not make the
jump between themselves and the characters pictured in the ad.
And they not only refused to believe the suggested identification.
but the disbelief spread to the performance claims themselves.
and killed the sales.
The key to avoiding such mistakes, of course, is the structure of the word, unbelievable. What makes an image—or a claim,
or an idea—believable or not believable? We shall discuss this
question thoroughly in the next few chapters. However, in relation to image-building, the answer lies in two points:
1. What do people already believe about the personality of
your product? Do they believe, today, that it has the character
traits that you say it has? And—if they do—can they identify
themselves, their lives, their present position in society, or their
next step up in society with these traits?
If the answer to both these questions is Yes, then you can

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

125

use the image exactly as you've conceived it. If, however, either
one of the answers is No, then vou must move on to the second
step:
2. What other primary image do I have to use as a
believability-bridge to connect what my prospect already believes
with what I want him to believe when he finishes my ad? If he
doesn't believe that mv product has those desirable character
traits, then I have to start with what he already believes. I have
to use these images as a base, and build up to my desired overall image, as we discussed before.
And, in addition, if mv prospect believes that my product
does possess these target-traits, but doesn't believe that they relate to his life, as it exists in either the present or the future,
then again I have to use a bridge-image. I have to insert a firstseen image that he can immediately identify with, and use that
acceptable identification as^a hook to hang my target-image on to.
For example, in the Marlboro ad, men who would never
identify themselves immediately with a yachting costume or an
opera hat, accepted the image completely after it was introduced
by the acceptable virility concept of the male model smoking the
cigarette.
If you demand that your prospect jump across a believabilitychasm, vour ad will fail. If, however, you build a bridge of ideas
or images across that chasm—starting on his side—then he will
let vou lead him almost anywhere.
On Saleable Identifications Springing
From the Physical Product Itself
We mentioned in Chapter 2 that for the purposes of preparing an advertisement, everv product can be considered to be
two products. There is the functional product—what the product does for the consumer. And there is the physical product—
what the consumer actually gets. In tapping mass desire, we put

126

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

aside the physical product, and concentrated on functional performances. Now, in searching for image-sources to build powerful identifications, we re-examine the physical product itself
lhe physical product can be broken down into three sem
lc
rate areas:
1. Its appearance;
2. Its components and structure; and
3. The technical background from which it emerged
Each one of these areas has image potential. In each one of
them you may find strong primary images that already exist Or
m each one of them you may be able to graft on related images
that will greatly increase the sales of your product
For example, the appearance of'vour product. As you receive it, that product's appearance is probably determined by function. Lets say that the product is mechanical, like a car In this
case, its appearance will be a combination of what it has to do
(ro 1 on a highway, carry six people, shelter them against wind
and rain, etc.), and the cheapest practical way of doing it. Out
of this combination of performance and^ economy comes the raw
shell of your c a r - i t s basic functional appearance. It is at this
point that you start to build in the images.
You do this in two ways. First, you exploit the dramatic primary images that already exist in the extreme forms of your product. For cars, for instance, you borrow from the glamour c a r s the severe streamlining and stabilizing fin of the racing c a r - t h e
hub caps and wheel wells of the sports c a r - t h e exhaust ports
and roof line of the custom car. And you blend their feeling of
excitement and power and distinction into the family sedan
But this is only the first step. Once you have exploited the
already-existing primary images in your product-if there are
any-you then begin to weave in other images that have absolutely nothing to do with the necessary physical structure of
your product. And you alter the appearance of your product to
accommodate and express these images.
' '

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: I D E N T I F I C A T I O N

127

For example, many products are chemical rather than mechanical. They are liquids, powders, sprays, granulates, etc. Therefore their physical appearance, to the manufacturer, is completely
arbitrary. Outside of the need to hold them together and shield
them against wear, their physical package can take any shape you
wish.
Here, of course, there are no primary images arising from
functional appearance at all. All the images that you wish to shape
into vour package must be borrowed. And where do you borrow
them from? From the background of your product. Or from its
components. Or from the values of society as a whole.
For example, the product's background. One of the most brilliant packaging concepts in years was Johnson & Johnson's Micrin. Here was a mouth wash—a liquid—sold in drug stores and
supermarkets—whose effectiveness far exceeded any similar product ever sold before. How were thev to convey that effectiveness
to the consumer at a glance?
They simply took the physical shape of glass containers that
are found only in doctors' offices and operating rooms, and transcribed that exact shape onto an over-the-counter product. Use
this shape to house an ice-blue liquid, that in itself suggests medical cleanliness, and you have a product that says instantly, "This
is doctor's-liquidNThis is medicine. This works."
Here the background of the product is symbolized in the
product's container. So effectively that the container itself becomes the finest image-illustration that the agency could use in
creating their ad. Where the background of your product contains elements that inspire excitement, drama, quality or helievahilitij to your prospect, then those elements should he expressed
either in the product itself, or in its package, or in its ad.
The same hypothesis holds true for the components that make
up your product. If vour product has electronic components, for
example, it should have an electronic flavor to both its appearance and its advertising. Shoiv the radar installations, guided mis-

128

SECOND T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: IDENTIFICATION

siles, jet aircraft that use the same parts. Life for the average man
is dull, completely lacking in adventure. Offer to let him participate in the frontier explorations of our world, and vou have welded
a tremendously potent appeal onto your product'

9
THE THIRD TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: GRADUALEATION

How to Make Your Prospect Believe
Your Claims Before You State Them
As we have learned before, for the
purpose of persuasion, the human mind may be divided into three
dimensions—three great rivers of emotional force that determine
the reaction to your ad, and therefore its success or failure.
The first of these dimensions is Desire—want, yearning, motivation—with specific goals and/or cures in mind—with the
prospect begging to be shown how to obtain them. It is the copy
writer's job to make sure the path to these goals goes through
the product—and to make sure that the prospect can visualize
every drop of satisfaction that their achievement will give him.
The second dimension is Identification—the need for expression and recognition—unformulated, unspoken, at least partially unconscious—searching for symbols, definitions and
embodiments. It is the copv writer's job to crystallize these self-

130

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: GRADUALIZATION

definitions and emboch' them in his product—so that the product
may be used, not only as a source of physical satisfaction, but also
as a symbolic extension of the personality of the prospect for whom
it is intended.
Until now, this book has been concerned with these first two
dimensions. They have determined the selection of our headline.
and our illustration, and most of the content of our ad.
But—important as they are—desire and identification alone
are never enough. By themselves, they can never produce the full
reaction the copy writer must have if he is to achieve the maximum success with his product. No matter how intense the desire.
no matter how demanding the need to identify, both these reactions must be fused with a third great emotional force—Belief—
before they can produce the final overwhelming determinant of
action—Absolute Conviction.
It is this fusion of desire and belief—this conviction—this
certainty—this feeling in the prospect of being right in his choice—
of being assured of what he has been promised—that the cop,/
writer seeks as his ultimate goal.
And it is to this third dimension of the human mind—the
Belief that produces this certainty—that we now turn.
What Exactly Is Belief?
It is perhaps the most complex fusion of thought and emotion in the human mind. It is, first of all, your prospects mental
picture of the world he lives in—what facts make it up, how it
works, in what direction its truths and values lie.
But these accepted facts, truths, values and opinions are
only the raw material of belief. Even more important is the vast
amount of emotional security he derives from these beliefs. It is
the wonderful feeling of comfort and reassurance of living in a
world that has meaning, where there are answers to be had.
where somehow the facts all fit. A world that he can understand
and depend on, that he can predict, that will stav together and

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

131

not blow up in his face tomorrow morning or the morning after
that.
Do not be misled for even a moment. The need to believe—
and the need for secure beliefs—is just as powerful an emotional
force as the strongest desire for physical satisfaction, or the most
urgent search for expression.
Most adults have done their basic learning of these beliefs
when they were children. At that time, and in that dependent
stage of their lives, they laid down the primary channels of belief that their minds would follow for the rest of their days. They
were forced to do this, in order to understand the world, to gain
its approval, to trust and master it, and to develop themselves
into self-sustaining adults.
To ask them to shatter even one of these alreadv-established
lines of belief—to plunge into uncertainty again—to be forced to
reassemble their beliefs in new, untested ways—is to ask them
to become children again. And—unless they are "frightened beyond belief," unless their entire conceptual world has crumbled
around them—thev simply will not do it.
The basic rule of belief, then, can simply be stated as this:
If vou violate vour prospect's established beliefs in the slightest degree—either in content or direction—then nothing you
promise him, no matter how appealing, can save your ad.
But, on the other hand, and even more important:
If you can channel the tremendous force of his belief—either
in content or direction—behind only one claim, no matter how
small, then that one fully-believed claim will sell more goods than
all the half-questioned promises vour competitors can write for
all the rest of their days. This channeling of belief is so powerful that, if properlv directed, it will even support othenvise-absurd
claims.
It is simply a question of whether you are going to paddle
upstream or down. Whether vou are going to work against the
tide of established belief, or with it.
As far as advertising is concerned, then, belief is immutable.

132

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

It cannot be changed. It must be complied with at everv step.
Every one of the statements you make in vour ad must fit in
with your prospects version of "the facts" at that precise moment. It is not the function of your ad to change those facts.
But it is its function—and one of its great sources of strength—
to extend them. To build a bridge of belief between those facts as
they exist in your prospect's mind today—and the ultimate facts
your prospect must believe if he is to accept your claims.
This process of starting with the facts that vour prospect is
already willing to accept, and leading him logically and comfortably through a gradual succession of more and more remote
facts—each of which he has been prepared in turn to accept—
is called Gradualization. It is the third Process of Persuasion.
Mind you, this process of Gradualization has nothing to do
with the offering of proof, or reason-why explanations, or testimonials or documentation. Each of these mechanisms of belief
adds to the power of your ad, and we will explore each of them
in turn in the chapters that follow.
In Chapter 11, we will discuss the verbal demonstration that
your product does what you claim—Mechanization.
In Chapter 12, we will discuss the destruction of alternate
ways of satisfying that same desire—Concentration.
In Chapter 14, we will discuss the offering of authorities and
proof, the reassurance that your prospect has made a wise c h o i c e Verification.
All these devices build belief. But by far the most fundamental of all—though the most inconspicuous—is Gradualization.
For Gradualization determines—not the content of your ad—but
its structure, its architecture, the way i/ou build it.'
We have already seen that it is the'dominating desire of your
prospect that determines the content of vour ad. It is his longings for identification and self-expression that, in most cases, determine your illustrations.
But it is the facts that he believes in and accepts, and the
way that he passes that acceptance along from one fact to

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

133

another, that determines that ad's development—the arrangement
of your claims and your images and vour proofs, so that there is
a step-bv-step strengthening—not only of your prospect's desire—
but of his conviction that the satisfaction of that desire will come
true through your product.
The Architecture of Belief
In essence, then, the theory of Gradualization is based upon
this fact:
That every claim, everv image, every proof in your ad has
two separate sources of strength—
1. The content of that statement itself; and
2. The preparation vou have made for that statement—either
by recognizing that preparation as already existing in your prospect's
mind, or bv deliberately laving the groundwork for that statement
in the preceding portion of the ad itself.
And, because of this fact, we can strengthen the power of
each of these statements in two separate ways—
1. Bv increasing the intensity of its content—by making
greater promises, bv portraying more dramatic images, by offering more compelling proof; and/or
2. Bv changing the place or position or sequence in which
that statement occurs in the ad—by strengthening the groundwork for belief in that statement by the material which precedes
it—and therefore increasing the intensity of belief given to it—
the immediate acceptance of its content, without question, when
the prospect encounters it in vour ad.
Make no mistake, it is this acceptance that we are looking
for. Effective advertising, like effective literature, is built—not of
words—but of reactions. We put down on paper an architecture
of words. If these words are effective, they evoke, in turn, an architecture of reactions in our prospect's mind. We are creating a
stream of acceptances, with a definite sequence and content and
direction, and, if we are successful, with a definite goal—the

134

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADUALIZATION

absolute conviction in your prospects mind that he must have
your product.
This is the essence of building your ad. We now turn to the
techniques of its accomplishment.
A New Definition of Awareness
We now know that Gradualization is the art of starting your
ad with a statement that will be immediately and entirely accepted, and then building a chain of subsequent acceptances upon
this first statement. The purpose of this chain of acceptances is
to lead your reader to a goal conclusion, which he will then accept, but which he would not as readily or as thoroughly have
accepted without the preliminary statements.
This quest for acceptance begins, of course, with vour headline. This all-important first statement that you make—this meeting place between your story and your prospect—must not only
be capable of awakening interest and desire, but of being accepted at the very first glance as being true.
Interest and believability—these are the two requirements
that determine your headline. We have already discussed these
requirements in Chapter 2, on the State of Awareness of our
market.
We can now redefine this State of Awareness as readiness to
accept. And we can now say—especially in the Fifth Stage of
Awareness—that the effectiveness of your headline is as much determined by the willingness of your audience to believe what it
says, as it is by the promises it makes.
This is the reason that you cannot always use the most powerful claim in your headline. Or even the very problem that your
product solves. Because without supporting evidence already existing in the mind of your prospect to prepare him for that headline claim, he just won't believe it. Either he'll believe that it's
exaggerated or false, or he just won't believe it applies to him.

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

135

In either case, too many of your prospects turn away without
reading on, and your ad fails.
This fact—that your most powerful claim does not always
make vour most powerful headline—is a paradox that many copy
writers still cannot accept. Mail order advertisers, however, have
a simple wav of proving it. When a power-claim headline doesn't
work—for reasons either of Awareness or Sophistication—they
immediatelv split it against a second head, with far fewer claims
in it, but far more likely to be believed. Then they build a beliefbridge from this second headline, to the same exact claims they
had featured in the first, but now anticipated by careful preparation every step along the way.
A Detailed Example
Let us take such an ad—that we have already glanced at in
Chapter 2—and break down its structure step by step. What we
are looking for here is not content, nor promises, nor claims; but
the way these promises and claims arc arranged in the ad, to
help each one of them gain full acceptance when it is encountered in turn by the prospect.
This ad was written in 1951. Its purpose was to sell a Television Repair Manual. Theoretically, every TV owner who was
having anv trouble with his set (and almost all of them were at
that time) was a prospect. But, before the prospect could be
turned into a customer, he had to believe two things:
1. That he could save money by making his own TV repairs;
and
2. That he was capable of making them.
Both these statements were matters of fact. The average TV
owner certainlv could save money if he had made his own repairs; and about 80% of those repairs were simple enough for
him to make himself.
But the overwhelming majority of prospects simply didn't

136

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: GRADUALIZATION

realize these facts. Most of them thought of themselves as nonhandymen, even in relation to far simpler devices than a television set. And, in 1951, the TV set was considered a complicated
mechanical monster, far beyond their poor powers to understand
let alone correct.
These two factors blocked the use of the obvious powerclaim headline for this product. Such a headline was written and
tested—"Save up to $100 a Year on Your TV Repairs!"—but it
failed to make a profit. The obvious was unsuccessful. Power
alone could not move the product.
Two tasks faced the copy writer in revising this ad. First, he
had to reach all his prospects in this market, and not just those
among them who considered themselves handymen. And second,
he had to convince all these non-handymen prospects that their
sets weren't really such fragile, complicated monsters after all,
and that they themselves could easily correct most troubles that
arose.
Once these two statements were believed by the prospect
and only then—could the previous headline claim of "Save up to
$100 a year on your TV repairs" be brought in at full power. Let
us see, acceptance by acceptance, how this new ad built to that
point:
The headline, first of all, would have to be a general statement, crystallizing and exploiting the universal resentment against
the high TV repair bills, the $60-a-vear TV service contracts that
were then in existence, and the outright thievery that occurred
in only a small fraction of the TV repair shops, but that had stigmatized the entire industry. From there—from this universallyaccepted resentment—the ad could then build toward the two
goal conclusions listed above. Let us see how this was done, statement by statement.
Here is the new headline:
"WHY HAVEN'T TV OWNERS BEEN TOLD
THESE FACTS?"

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

137

No claim. No promise—except that of disclosure. But here
is an implication of foul plav, which echoed the existing suspicion in the TV owner himself. Here is a crystallization and outright expression that the average owner felt toward being taken.
Facts have been withheld. This is something he can agree with!
Thus, having achieved its first acceptance by its suspicionheadline, the ad reinforces that effect by an inclusion-question.
It asks a questions which, in form, seems to limit the market; but
which, in content, actually assures the correct answer by the overwhelming majority of it:
"Was i/our set purchased after the spring of 1947?"
95% of television owners would answer Yes. Thus the ad has
built two acceptances in its first two sentences. It has started a
Habit of Agreement in its reader. It now exploits that agreement
by making its first definite promise in the third sentence:
"Then here is the full, uncensored stonj of how yon
can avoid those $15-$20 repair bills—avoid those $30-$60
a year service fees—and still get the perfect, movie-clear
pictures you've dreamed about!"

H o w Belief Was Built Into the Opening
This is the ad's first claim. Its content alone is extremelv
powerful. But that powerful content—which otherwise might drive
many readers awav as being just too fantastic to be believed—
has been given extra belief—has been loaned, as it were, extra
belief—not only by the first two sentences that preceded it—but
by these deliberate constructions in the statement itself:
1. By the grammatical construction, "Was your. . ." in the
second sentence, and "Then . . ." in the third which by its very
form generates belief. It does this by implying exclusion. It says
that the promise will come true only in certain cases; that it will
only work for television sets purchased after 1947; that the ad
cannot make this promise for sets purchased earlier. Thus it adds

138

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E OF B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: GRADUALIZATION

credence to whatever statement follows it. Yon can feel this added
believability yourself by taking out the lead-word "Then" from
the sentence and reading it again. Immediately, it loses half its
force—force added to the content of the statement by the
grammatical-bridge tying it in to the first two acceptances.
2. The second attempt at adding believabilitv is bv the descriptive nature of the promise. It is not onlv a promise of reward (the money saved), but a catalog of almost-universal symptoms (repair bills and service fees). Since the overwhelming
majority of set owners are suffering from these problems, their
descriptions evoke two more "Yes—I have them" reactions from
the reader, and carry these reactions over to the save-monev
claims that immediately follow them. If these descriptions were
eliminated, the money-saving claims would be much weaker:
"Then here is the full, uncensored story of liow you can save
$15-$20—save $30-$60—save $90-$ 100 on your' TY set—and
still get the perfect, movie-clear pictures you've dreamed about!"
3. And finally, even though the causes of the set owner's
problems are specifically described, the cures for them are deliberately left ambiguous. The fact that thev will save otherwise
wasted money, that they will get improved reception, is included—
how they will do this is not. The mechanism bv which these goals
will be accomplished is left out. It is left out because the reader
has not yet been prepared for it. If he were to learn, at this moment in the ad, that he had to make repairs on his set to save
this money, the average reader would turn the page. So he is
given specific symptoms, that he will agree he has, and specific
savings by eliminating them, that are certainly logical to expect.
He may or may not accept all these three claims in the sentence
completely; but the strength of their promise, the two or three
or four acceptances that he has already given, and the implied
disclosures still remaining in the body of the ad, should be enough
to carry him on, to this next paragraph:
"How many times this week have you had to get up to fix

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

139

a jumpy TV picture? . . . How many times have you had to put
up with ghosts? . . . How many times. . . ."
Here again is reinforcement of belief—the description of
universal symptoms—the coaxing out of a stream of agreements.
"Yes . . . Yes . . . Yes"—he must answer if he has had trouble with
his set. A habit of acceptance is being built inside him. Trust is
being formed, layer by laver—as each question poses a test, and
each ves answer proves to the reader that the ad is talking about
him.
Already the ad is beginning to weave its pattern of promise
and belief and then promise again. Now, with as many as seven
or eight agreements behind it to establish a firm foundation of
belief, the ad moves on to its next great promise:
"90% Of These Breakdowns Are Unnecessary!"
"All of these breakdowns may have seemed tragic to
you at the moment they happened—but here is the real
tragedy! Do you know that the same exact set that you now
have in your front room . . . has been playing in manufacturer's test rooms for months—and playing perfectly!"
Goal Conclusions
The ad is now laving the1 basis for the first of its two goal
conclusions—that TV sets are not fragile—that they have amazing endurance if they are properlv cared for. Only when the
reader accepts this fact, can the ad go on to its second conclusion—that whatever minor breakdowns do occur can be easily
handled bv the owner himself.
But the ad is still five paragraphs awav from any mention of
the owner touching his set. First it must establish the dependability of the set; and it does this bv two methods. At the start,
in the following two paragraphs, it gives graphic descriptions of
the manufacturer's own tests used to establish this dependability:
"These sets have been subjected to 'Breakdown Tests'
that would seem incredible to the average owner. They have

140

THIRD TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

been tamed on for 24 hours a day—7 days a week 4
iceeks a month. Some of these sets have been naming without a moment's pause for as much as 17 months.
"These sets have been tested against almost every conceivable type of viewing hazard. . . up to 120 miles away
from the station . . . against the interference of an entire
warehouse of electrical appliances . . . in special, steel-ribbed
buildings, which ordinarily would produce several distinct
ghosts.
"And in almost every one of these cases, these sets
have produced perfect, movie-clear pictures—without major
breakdowns—for as much as one full year! Here are some
of the reasons why:"
Then, when the reader has fully visualized the impact of
these test reports, the ad now turns to expert authority and logical construction to reinforce this belief. Notice in the next fewparagraphs how the ad picks up the already-accepted condition.
"If your set were properly cared for, as these sets were . . .", and
uses that now-established condition to prove the series of statements that follow it:
"What TV Experts Have Learned About Your Set!"
"If your set were properly cared for—as these sets
were cared for in these tests—it need break down only once
during the entire year! In other words, you may actually
have to call in a repairman only once during the entire
year You can save the $30-$60 'service fees you are nowpaying—and you can save most of the SI OS 15 repair bills."
"If your set was properly cared for. if can actually give
you perfect, movie-clear reception the other 364 days a year.
It can give you this perfect reception without special 'electronic equipment—without the help of a repairman—up to
100 miles away from your station."
Notice that in these two paragraphs, the ad returns to the
claims made in the third sentence—repeats them almost word for
word—and then gives logical proof, in logical form, for each of
them. As we have pointed out before, these claims—"you can avoid
those $15-420 repair bills—avoid those $30-$60 a year service

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

141

fees—and still get the perfect, movie-clear picture ijou've dreamed
about!"—were stated in the third sentence without supporting proof
at that time; but with strong implication—"Here is the full, uncensored. story . . ."—that such proof would follow.
That proof is now submitted, in an extremely formal and logical structure. Thus the ad again weaves proof into promise—repeating previous claims in a new context of full documentation,
where it could only suggest that they would be proven before.
Notice also that this logical proof—"If your set were cared
for. . . it need break down only once a year. . . you need call a
repairman only once a year. . . you save the service fees and most
repair bills."—is, in itself, solidly grounded in the test-proof presented in the paragraphs before it—"being subjected to Breakdown tests . . . against almost every type of viewing hazard . . .
and produced perfect pictures, without breakdowns, for as much
as one full year" Thus a chain of proof upon proof is constructed—
each new statement repeating the heart of the proof before it.
Thus the ad has now proved—bv using the Mechanism of Intensification—by repeating the same theme-content seven different times in seven different wavs—that vour TV set is dependable.

The Ultimate Objective
This was the first goal-conclusion. At this point the reader
is convinced that it is true. The ad is now ready to go on to prove
the second goal conclusion: that the owner can correct minor
breakdowns himself.
It begins this proof in the verv next paragraph, in this way:
"And, most important, these experts have discovered
that you do not have to he a handyman or a mechanic in
order to coax this performance out of your set! Here's why"
Notice that it is in this paragraph that the entirely-new (to
the reader) assumption—that vou can fix your own minor breakdowns—is first introduced. Yet its novelty is deliberately con-

142

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

cealed; it is presented as though it were simply another rephrasing
of the bv-now already accepted dependability conclusion. There
is therefore no break in the logical flow of proof. Acceptance is
built into this entirely new statement in these four different ways:
1. By paragraph parallelism. By framing the statement as the
last of a series of similar paragraphs—all the others of which have
already been accepted—instead of physically setting it off as a
new point with its own sub head and a different construction, as
the reader would ordinarily expect.
2. By the lead word, "And," a tie-in phrase, which indicates
that the sentence accompanying it is the same as those that have
gone before.
3. By immediately following "And" by a second tie-in phrase,
"most important," which again implies that the remainder of the
statement is part of the series that has gone before.
4. And finally, by repeating the phrase, "these experts have
discovered," which echoes the identifying subhead at the beginning of the series, and carries on the acceptance-momentum of
the series as a whole.
All these deliberate constructions combine to give this short,
but vital, transitional paragraph the acceptance, and therefore the
believability, of all the careful planning that has gone before it.
They allow the reader to make what otherwise might be a jarring transition from already-established proof to an entirely new
promise with a minimum of effort.
Now the ad builds its final step—showing that the only repairs that the average owner will have to make are actually minor
external adjustments on his set. Notice how it integrates this newextension of its previous thought into what has gone before bv
starting with the phrase, once again, "These experts have discovered . . . "
Here are the next three paragraphs:
"Five Minutes a Week for Perfect Reception."
"These T\r experts have discovered that ipur 7T set
is a great deal like your body in this respect—that it gives

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADLALIZATION

143

you learning signals before it has a major breakdown. For
instance, after your set was installed, it probably played perfectly for the first week. But then it began to suffer from the
vibration, the jarring, the interference of other electrical appliances in your home. The picture might suddenly begin to
flop over or flicker—lines may appear on your screen.
"Now—and this is important—if you had the knowledge
to quickly make a few minor adjustments, on the outside
controls of your set, then you could correct those symptoms, you could keep that set playing peifectly, and you
could prevent major breakdowns in exactly the same way
they were prevented in these manufacturers' tests.
"If you do not have this knowledge . . . if you do not
make these adjustments, then your set trill weaken, you will
get a consistently bad picture, and you will have to call a
repairman."
The second goal-conclusion of the ad has now been reached.
At this stage of the copy, the reader now knows:
f. That his set is dependable enough to ayoid major breakdowns during by far the greatest majority of the time he will playit; and
2. That if he obtains the proper knowledge, he can correct
minor breakdowns himself, and help prevent the gradual formation of major breakdowns, by making a few simple adjustments
to the outside controls of his set.
Therefore, the stage has now- been set for the final conclusion—the pay-off conclusion—a conclusion with all the inevitable
logical force of a syllogism—that:
3. The owner should obtain this knowledge—make these
minor adjustments himself—and therefore save the money he is
paying today for sen-ice contracts, and save by far the greatest
majority of the money he is paying for repair bills.
Here is how this final conclusion is phrased by the copy:
"It's as simple as that. You pay a repairman—not for
his work—but for his knowledge. If you had that knowledge yourself—then you would not have to pay him at all."

144

T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADLE

A Restatement of Our Basic Theory
We have taken a great deal of space to analyze, in exact detail, one ad, and the structure of believabilitv that underlies the
effectiveness of its claims.
We have done this for two reasons:
1. To show how the goal-conclusion—the introduction of the
product claim itself—may be made far more effective if it is delayed till the prospect has been prepared to accept it. And
2. To show how this full acceptance—this willingness to believe without question-can gradually be built up, layer by laver
agreement by agreement, by use of the proper structure.' '
Let us now state formally some of the rules we have dis
covered in this analysis, and some of the devices vou can use
time after time, to create the maximum structural believabiliti,
tor each of your advertisements.
Here are the basic principles:
Gradualization is the art of stating a claim in such a wav
that it will receive the greatest possible acceptance and/or believabilitv from your prospect.
Belief ultimately depends upon structure. Just as desire depends upon promise, so belief in that promise depends upon the
amount of preparation that promise has been given before vour
reader is asked to accept it.
One fully-believed promise has ten times the sales power often partially-believed promises. Most copy writers try to strengthen
ads by piling promise upon promise. What thev usually get for
their troubles is greater sales resistance from their prospects and
trouble from the E T C . They could far better invest the same
time in strengthening the believabilitu-structure of the original
justifiable promise.
Now, how do you strengthen this believability-structure*
What are the devices you can choose from to add believabilitv
to any promise, in any ad?

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

145

Here are at least a few of them. Once vou get the feel of
using them, you'll probably develop a whole armorv of vour own.
1. The Inclusion Question
Designed to permit immediate identification with vour storv.
To show the prospect that you're talking about him—not about
someone else who would answer No to the question. Therefore,
once he's identified with the questions—once he's made his first
agreements with you and placed himself in the Yes-answer group—
then your recommendations will have special meaning for him.
This is perhaps the most direct wav of building agreement
at the beginning of the ad. It's used everv day. For example, in
this advertisement—highly successful—for a book called The Art
of Selfishness:
ASK YOURSELF THESE NINE QUESTIONS
1. Do you find it increasinglv difficult to cope with
the world around you. . . .
2. Is your business or career a source of annoyance
and frustration. . . .
3. Are you tormented by inadequacies, fear and embarrassments in your sex life. . . .
And so on.

2. Detailed Identification
Another device used at the beginning of the ad, to establish
immediate, and deep, agreement between the reader and the
copy. Here, instead of asking questions to set up your Yes-train,
you detail symptoms or problems that are your prospect's reasons
for desiring your product. Thus, again, your reader knows that
vou are talking about him—that vou "have been there vourself"—
and therefore that your recommendations will help answer these
problems, his problems, that you have catalogued so well.

146

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E OE B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: CRADUALIZATIOX

For example, in this ad for a course to improve the prospect's
child's grades in school:
Let me explain. I don't care whether your child is six
years old or twenty—boy or girl—in grade school high
school or college. It makes no difference how badly that
child is doing in school today—how difficult it is for him
to concentrate . . . how poor his memory mav be . . . howmuch a prisoner he is of crippling mental habits . . . how
terrified he mav be of mathematics, or grammar, or social
studi es, or even the hardest science course.
Of course, here—as in the Inclusion-Question—vour copv
must be accurate. You must know enough about the reader's
problems to make every word you write ring true. If vou don't,
you'll shatter your believability-net, and he'll simply' turn the

page.
So—before you write—research. Learn to know vour customer. This is alwavs the essential first step, in anv kind of copv

3. Contradiction of Present (False) Beliefs
Again, used at the beginning of the ad. And again used to
prepare a foundation for strong claim-statements that the reader
might never accept raw. Here, you come bluntly out and say, "I
know you think this is true; but I'm going to show YOU it's false."
Best used, of course, in conjunction with strong authority strong
enough to contradict present (unpleasant) beliefs, and get away
with it.
For example, in an ad for cosmetics invented by a famous
plastic surgeon:
From this moment on, forget everything you have ever
heard or read about what age "must do" to your appearance. Forget anything you have ever believed about how
"old" you must look at thirty . . . forty . . . fifty . . . or even
sixty. . . .

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: GRADUALIZATION

147

Here vou are not looking for agreement as much as you are
for a loosening of previous beliefs. You are saying that the old
limitations are passing, and your next paragraph should be your
first introduction of your positive claims, in somewhat the same
way that this ad goes on:
Because—starting with this moment—you are about
to enter into a new world of beautv! A world where ordinary fruits are transformed into anti-wrinkle cosmetics.
Where a. . . .
And so on.

4. The Language of Logic
So far, the devices we have discussed have been used to
build belief at the beginning of vour ad—to serve in the crucial
transition from vour headline to the stream of intensified promises that vou are going to use to close the sale.
We have discussed the process of intensifying desire in
Chapter 7. We now turn to the simultaneous, and equally important, task of maintaining belief in each new statement as you
present it.
Here again, your objective is to build belief at the same exact
time that vou build desire. To do this, you interlace each new
promise tcith language-signals that show that it logically follows
from everything that has been proved before. And that it therefore can be believed without hesitation.
What are these language-signals? They are, of course, the
vocabulary of logic. They are the words we use when we reason:
when we argue; when we prove our point in anv discussion, and
force others to agree with us that we are right.
They are among the most powerful words in the English language—for the verv simple reason that they give the flavor of
conviction to the promises into which we weave them.
These words have been used for centuries in court, in politics,

148

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

in science—even in that most-loved form of American fiction,
detective stories—to show others that proof has been offered.
that reason has been used, that one statement logically and inevitably follows from another.
Therefore, after centuries of conditioning, the words themselves—regardless of the content of the statements to which thev
are attached—now carry conviction. Therefore, thev should be
woven throughout your ad, wherever thev logically apply.
For example, let's look at some individual lines, in a number of different ads. Let's see how each of these words (which
I'll italicize) gives a tone of reason and logic to those sentences
in which they're incorporated.
For example, in the famous Sherwin Codv ad:
Why do so many find themselves at a loss for words
to express their meaning adequately 0 The reason for this
deficiency is clear. . . . Most persons do not write or speak
good English simply because thev have never formed the
habit of doing so. . . .
Or, in this ad for a book on how to manage difficult people:
Take, as an example, the man who hahitualhj refuses
to follow your instructions. There is a basic, underlying reason for this. Mr. Given shows you how to find that reason
and then explains the means of correcting it. The whole
solution can be surprisingly easy once you hate realized the
underlying causes. . . .
Or, for a book on learning how to learn:
. . . but simply by putting your LOCKED-UP LEARNING POWERS to work—today—as easily and logically as
this. . . .
'
"
'
And so on. There are dozens of such phrases for vou to use.
Among them are:
"This has been proved In/ thousands. . . ."
"Sound impossible? Not at all. It's actually
simple. . . ."

as

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATION

149

"Here's whtj. . . ."
"And, most important of all. is the fact that. . . ."
"Therefore . . ."
"This was, without a doubt, the most thorough. . . ."
"Thev discovered—in case after case—that. . . ."
This, again, is the language of logic. It is a language equally
as filled with emotion as the language of desire. Interwoven into
your promises, so subtly that the reader never even notices that
it is there, it gives vour claims the invaluable air of conviction.

5. Svllogistic Thinking
Now we go from the language of logic to the mechanisms
of logic. This is the role that reason plays in your ad. This is the
moment when you prove that your product works, through the
mechanism of logical reasoning.
For example, in one of the most successful automotive accessory ads of all time, the copywriter wanted to prove that his
spark plug was superior to the ordinary plug—even though it
costs twice as much. Since the point of difference was simply
that his plug delivered a larger spark, the copywriter built up his
case in this way:
Your car runs because gasoline is fed into the cylinders where a spark causes it to fire. This action causes the
gas to explode . . . this explosion pushes down the piston.
Now here is the important thing to you. The larger the
spark is, the more powerful the explosion. The more powerful the explosion, the more power you get from your
gasoline.
Poor explosion means wasted gas—loss of power, poor
getaway, bad starting, a sluggish car.
Good explosion means more miles per gallon—more
horsepower; a more exciting car to drive!
Notice the power of these three simple paragraphs. Power
derived as much from their underlying formal structure as from

150

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CRADUALIZATION

their claims. One statement inevitably leads into another. Evenword is logical. There is a constant process of equation: spark to
power, power to performance. Size equals power—and his plug
delivers the largest size.
Such structure—and the copv based on such a structure—
develops the feeling of inevitability. The reader feels that the
product must work. He has not onlv been told it works; he has
been shown proof that it works.
Such structure—though hidden behind the words it clothes
itself in—is actually a physical entity. You can seek it out of hundreds of ads, if you look beneath the words themselves. You can
trace it, codify it, and then repeat it. Once learned, it becomes
a powerful tool in selling hundreds of products.
We will explore these structures in more depth in the next
two chapters—on Redefinition and Mechanization.
6. Other Belief Forms
Once you grasp the fundamental idea that form—structure—
determines believabilitv, then all sorts of opportunities open up
to you. You realize that simply by the arrangement of i/our claims,
you can add to their believabilitv.
For example:
Contingency Structures—such as "If. . . then . . .", or "Wis
your...then...."
Repetition of Proof: Echoing—such as "These experts
found. . . . These experts found. . . . These experts found. . . . "
Promise—Belief—Promise Variation. Where every sentence
of promise is followed (ideally) with another of proof, or verification, or documentation. So that the reader never has the breathing space to question.
Paragraph Parallelism. Where the same word structure used
in an accepted statement is then picked up exactly, and used to
borrow acceptance for a fresh claim.

T H I R D T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: GRADUALIZATIOX

151

There are manv more, of course. Some are words, some are
chains of reasoning, some are merelv the physical arrangement
of the copy on the page.
All have the same objective. To gain continued acceptance.
To prevent rejection. To build conviction. Belief is the goal.
Now let us look at some other methods of reinforcing it.

10
THE FOURTH TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: REDEFINITION

How to Remove Objections to Your Product
Time and time again, you are
going to have to sell a product that has built-in handicaps. That—
along with its promises and its functions—also has certain aspects
to it that actually repel the prospect.
No product, of course, is perfect. If only for the reason that
he must pav money for what you have to sell, your prospect starts
with a basic minimum of resistance against buying your product.
But this resistance is intensified by certain drawbacks in some
products, often to the point where—unless you take definite action in your ad to redefine them—these drawbacks will actually
kill your sale.
Let us now look at the three general categories of drawback,
and then at the three types of redefinition that eliminates them.
First, of course, there is the product that is (or that sounds)
too complicated—too hard to use.
153

154

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

Second, there is the product that is not important enough—
whose basic appeal doesn't have a statistically broad enough
market.
And third, there is the product that just costs too much. Its
price is so much above the price of other products in its class
that people simply turn away when it's mentioned.
It's amazing how many products fall into one or all of these
categories. Fortunately, the same mechanism—redefinition—helps
you deal with all three.
Redefinition is the process of giving a new definition to your
product. It says that the product is this rather than that. Its objective is to remove a roadblock to your sale—if possible, before
the prospect even knows it exists.
Perhaps the classic case of redefinition is that of Lifebuov
soap in the Thirties. Lifebuoy was a good soap that did a good
cleaning job. But it had one overwhelming drawback—a horrible
medicinal odor.
Since the odor couldn't be removed without removing the
cletamng power, the problem became one of redefinition. Put simply: how do we change this odor from a liability into an asset?
The answer, of course, was the famous B.O. campaign. The
prospect's attention was focussed on the odor of his own bodv—
an odor which he was told would drive away people (and which
does).
He was then told this odor must be eradicated—not with an
ordinary soap, which was not powerful enough to do the job
but with a soap with the odor-destroying power to make a longshoreman acceptable at a society ball. Lifebuov was this superpowerful soap. And the overwhelming proof—that von could smell
the moment you opened the wrapper—was the strong medicinal
odor built into every cake.
This is the simplest, and often the most effective kind of redefinition. A simple concept-judo. A complete reversal. Turning
a liability into an asset, with a single idea.
Wherever you can use this flip-flop method, do so. But most

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

lOO

problems of redefinition are more complicated, and demand more
complicated means of dealing with them—using many of the devices we have just examined in the process of Gradualization.
Let us now turn to these devices, and see how they can present an entirelv different image of the product to the prospect
than vou would have imaginetl, had you not thought them through
beforehand.
1. Simplification
Our first category is the overcomplicated product—the product that sounds too hard. To see how to replace this image with
a more favorable one, let's look again at the Television Repair
Book ad that we discussed in the last chapter.
As vou remember, the original ad for this product failed because it promised "Do your own TV repairs" in its headline. This
was considered too difficult by the average set owner (even though
the ad said "It's easy, its simple, it's quick" in the next paragraph).
Therefore—since the ad confronted the prospect with the fact
that he would have to make repairs before it made those repairs
easy and simple and quick—he simply- turned the page and tuned
the ad out.
The second ad did not discuss repairs. It discussed breakdowns and expenses. And, as we have seen, it spent its first several paragraphs showing that these breakdowns and expenses did
not have to occur at all, if the sets were given the proper care.
Up to this point, the ad has talked about the prospect's
world—and compared it with a far more promising world where
expert care produces trouble-free TV viewing. Now the two worlds
must be joined through the product.
This joining is called by the pitchman, "the turn." It is a
transition of great delicacy. It must be accomplished without a
jar. In this ad, it begins in this paragraph:
And most important, these experts have discovered
that vou do not have to be a handyman or a mechanic in

156

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

order to coax this performance out of vour set! Here's
why. . . .
We have already seen how the repetition ( . . . these experts
have discovered . . . ) and the paragraph parallelism tie this statement into the stream of belief that has been built up before it.
Now, however, we are going to look at this same paragraph from
another point of view—to see how it provides the first step in
eliminating any fear of making your own repairs.
Notice, of course, that the very fear of the average owner.
that he is not a repairman, is here brought out in the o p e n specifically stated—but now framed as a promise.
Notice too that there is no mention of the word, "repair," at
this point. It is still too early at this point. Though the average owner might be willing to accept the idea that he could "coax" better
performance out of his set, it would still be too much to ask him
to believe that he could make repairs on that set at this point.
This leads to the final step. The ad must now redefine what
the reader thinks of when he hears the word "repairs." It must
now lay a new foundation of feet—showing that almost all the
repairs the owner will have to make are actually only minor external adjustments.
It now proceeds to do this, in the following three paragraphs
which we have already studied in the last chapter, and which we
will now look at again to see the second process of p e r s u a s i o n redefinition—which is also occurring in them.
Here are the paragraphs again:
Five Minutes a Week for Perfect Reception.
These TV experts have discovered that vour TV set is
a great deal like vour body in this respect—that it gives you
warning signals before it has a major breakdown.' For'instance, after your set was installed, 'it probably plaved perfectly for the first week. But then it began to suffer from the
vibration, the jarring, the interference of other electrical appliances in your home. The picture might suddenly begin to
flop over or flicker—lines may appear on vour screen.

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

157

Now—and this is important—if you had the knowledge to quickly make a few minor adjustments, on the outside controls of vour set. then vou could correct those symptoms. you could keep that set playing perfectly, and you
could prevent major breakdowns in exactly die same way
thev were prevented in these manufacturers' tests.
If you do not have this knowledge . . . if you do not
make these adjustments, then your set will weaken, you
will get a consistently bad picture, and you will have to call
a repairman.
Now, what occurs in these four paragraphs is actually a redefinition of the term, "repairs" in the reader's mind. This is done
in three separate, but integrated, wax's:
1. By immediately comparing the television set to the human
body, and therefore minor maladjustments in the set to warning
signals given off bv the body before it becomes seriously ill.
By "making this comparison, the copy relates the intricate,
technical working of a television set to something as commonplace
and familiar as the running nose that warns you of an approaching cold. Because of this comparison, some of the mystery of the
set is explained away; and the owner gains a new feeling of confidence in dealing with it himself, as something he understands.
And, at the same time, this comparison distinguishes between the relatively rare major breakdowns, and the far more
frequent minor maladjustments, which he can now treat himself
as easily as he'd take a cold tablet to stop his running nose.
2. 'By continuously describing these minor maladjustments
as 'warning signals" and "symptoms" rather than "breakdowns"
or "repairs." This makes them sound easily corrected—-before real
trouble, which might require technical skill and complicated tools,
can develop out of them.
3. And finally, by stating outright that these minor adjustments can be corrected by "making a few minor adjustments, on
the outside controls of your set."
Therefore, "repairs" are redefined as "adjustments." Troubles
on the TV screen are redefined as 'warning signals" or "symp-

158

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

toms." And "repair calls" or "breakdowns" are carefully segregated
into the least-likely-to-occur 5% of all possible TV troubles.
Therefore, with this redefinition in mind—with this reorganization of facts accomplished by the copy—there is no longer any
reason for the average set owner not to make his oivn minor adjustments, rather than pay a repairman to make them for him.
The objective has been accomplished. The ad can now go
on to specifically state how much monev the owner will save by
making these adjustments—and where he can buv the book that
tells him how.
In exactly the same way, whenever there is a process which
is difficult. . . whenever there is a product which is hard to use,
or difficult to apply—the copywriters first task is to simplify that
application in his prospect's mind.
This holds especially true for new inventions which actually
simplify processes which formerly were too difficult for the average prospect. A new breakthrough is not merely accepted because its manufacturer says so. Its claims for ease and simplicity
must be proved, in the ad, or the reader will simply shrug his
shoulders and say "it's just another copywriter gone wild."
Such a situation is one of the most frustrating experiences
you can have. Here is a product which vou know is far easier to
use than anything ever introduced in this field before—because
you've used it! But no matter how loud you scream EASY in your
ads, people just seem to ignore vou.
What do you do? The answer is twofold:
1. Redefine (as this chapter shows vou).
2. Mechanize the new simplicity (as you'll see in the next
chapter).
Remember, innovation without acceptance is valueless. The
more people know that something is difficult, and the more revolutionary (and therefore different) your product is—the more
resistance you will meet from them in accepting it.
You must, therefore, lay a base for acceptance by redefining
the entire field for them, before vou bring in vour product.

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

lb9

Let's look at one more example of such breakthrough advertising, and see the solutions the copy offered that made the
product a success.
One of the great ads of all times, of course, is the Sherwin
Codv ad. Though most advertising men are familiar with the ad,
they do not realize that the course itself was a tremendous departure for the times—far easier and simpler than anything else
that had gone before.
But the prospects for such a course were absolutely convinced that good English was too hard for them. They had tried
to learn it before, and had failed. Therefore, any new course that
could be successfully sold to them would have to redefine English for them . . . redefine mistakes in English for them . . . and
certainly redefine the process of turning; bad English into good
English for them.
The Codv ad is a masterpiece of Gradualization. It should
be memorized—not merely studied—by every copywriter. However, within it, in four paragraphs, is contained another masterpiece of breakthrough redefinition—from hard to easy with a few
simple ideas—that goes like this:
Onlv 15 Minutes a Day.
Nor is there verv much to learn. In Mr. Cody's years
of experimenting, he brought to light some highly astonishing facts about English.
For instance, statistics show that a list of sixty-nine
words (with their repetitions) make up more than half of
all our speech and letter-icritin<i. Obviously, if we could
learn to spell, use and pronounce these words correctly,
we would go far toward eliminating incorrect spelling and
pronunciation.
Similarly, Mr. Cody proved that there were no more
than one dozen fundamental principles of punctuation. If
we mastered these principles, there would be no bugbear
of punctuation to hamper us in our writing.
Finally he discovered that twenty-five typical errors in
grammar constitute nine-tenths of our everyday mistakes.
When one has learned how to avoid these twenty-five

160

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

pitfalls, how readily one can obtain the facility of speech
which denotes the person of breeding and education!
When the study of English is made so simple, it becomes clear that progress can be made in a very short time.
No more than fifteen minutes a dav is required
Thus the complicated becomes simple—the hard becomes
easy. This is the first use of Redefinition. Now let's look at the
second:

2. Escalation
H e r e you are dealing with a product which works, and which
is acknowledged to be easy enough to use—but which simply
does not have an appeal broad enough to assure it of a mass
market.
Your job here is to escalate your product. To give it more
importance in your prospect's eves.
You do this again by Redefinition. You broaden the horizon
of benefits of the product. You redefine the role that the product pla\ s in the prospect's life. You widen the area of reward that
your product yields to the prospect—showing him that it enters
into dozens of vital situations every day, paving off for him wherehe might least expect it.
For example, let's look at another ad for another English
course forty years later. By now people are not as sensitive to
their punctuation or grammar. Now the negative aspect has lost
its appeal; people want good English as a persuasion tool to win
over other people.
So good English must cease to be an end in itself. It must
be redefined, to become instead a means to a more important
end—one which is desired by far more people. And, since the
positive aspect must now be dominant, that part of good English
which lias the greatest value for persuading people—vocabulary—
must now be featured.

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

161

Here is the ad:
Revolutionary new Word Power Machine makes you
a master of English overnight.
Automatically gives vou a power-packed vocabulary—
to make your ideas crackle with excitement . . . to hold others spellbound with the power of vour speech and your
written word.
Automatically spots embarrassing errors in grammar,
spelling, pronunciation vou didn't even know you were
making. Clears them up at once. Frees vour mind from
worrv . . . lets you feel at ease in am- company . . . gives
vou the blazing new self-confidence vou need to make anybody like you—to win people over irresistiblv to your point
of view. . . .
This approach redefines the benefits of the product, shifting
them from a less desirable area to one that will generate more
sales appeal.
But this use of escalation—to increase benefit appeal—is only
one of the ways it can serve vou. Another is to increase the importance of the product—showing that something the prospect
wants very much hinges directh upon the performance of your
product.
For example, in an ad for spark plugs, this fact was pointed
out to the reader:
Yes. You pay $2,000 . . . 83.000 . . . $4,000 for your car.
And a single 99c part robs i/ou of the real power and enjoyment that car should give you.
Or here, in an advertisement for a speed math course:
If you want to get ahead f a s t . . . if vou want a position of real importance and responsibility—then a knowledge of this kind of super-fast, super-accurate mathematics
is 'AN ABSOLUTE NECESSITY for your future!
Or escalation can be used to show the prospect that your
product is not something to be put to work just once or twice a

162

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

week—but that it will be needed, and used, by him almost e v e n
waking minute. Here's how this was done, in a single sub headline, in an ad for a course on handling people:
Your Entire Life is Spent Trying to Get Others to Do
What You Want—Without Fricti Oil:
You must agree with this statement. And therefore you must
redefine the importance to yourself of a technique which allows
you to accomplish the all-pervading task more easily, more effectively and more rapidly
This is the second use of Redefinition—escalation. Now let's
look at the third.

3. Price Reduction
Here you have the product which, quite simply, costs too
much. Your job is to make that price seem less. You do it by a
very simple act of redefinition, like this:
Why does the product cost too much? Because it's being
compared icith other products in the same field. And how do you
whittle away, psychologically, at this price? Bij switching the comparison, and relating it to some other, more expensive standard.
For example, here is an enormously successful mail order ad
for spark plugs, which sold for $1.49 each, or one and a half
times the standard for the field, and twice as much as the discount price. Did the copywriter therefore sav that "Thev mav
cost a little more, but they're worth every cent of it." Of course
not. He made them cheap, and he did it in these two paragraphs
of psychological redefinition:
Up to now these extraordinary SA FIRE INJECTORS
were practically made by hand and would have to sell for
as high as $5 each. But we knew that 30 or 40 dollars was
more than the average driver could afford—so we decided
to get the price down so low that these injectors would pav
for themselves 12 times in one year of driving. So here is

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

lb.3

inv astonishing proposition. If you will check your cars performance before and after you install your SA Fire Injector System and then tell your friends and neighbors about
them, here is what I am prepared to do for TOIL
You can have a set of SA FIRE INJECTORS for the
year and model of your ear for only a fraction of their
value. If you act now they are only SI.49 each. . . .
Do you see how he does it? Do you see how many times
he does it in these two short paragraphs? As a last review of redefinition—because its techniques are so important to you—let's
just list the individual phrases that build up. again and again, the
feeling of value and bargain.
Here they are. Did vou catch them all?
"practically made by hand . .
"would have to sell for as hi^h as So each . . ."
"30 or 40 dollars . . ." (Notice that he repeats the hand-made
price twice. First he gives it to vou per plug; and then jor the
entire set. Thus the new comparative price is reinforced; you
practically wince at the $40 figure since vou want the plugs by
this time. And you're going to feel pretty good when he brings
in the now-lower figure in the next paragraph.)
"pet the price down so low . . ." (Here is the magic word,
"low"; now legitimatized in your exes by the description of the
hand-made set in the phrases that preceded it.)
"that these injectors would pay for themselves 12 times in
one year of driving. . ." (Not only value, but reward. Not only
low-priced, but gas-saving. And again, the comparison to a higher
figure—this time the money you'll save on gas.)
"astonishing proposition . . ." (Now the price becomes so low
that the mere statement of it may cause you surprise. It may
sound slightlv cornv as we dissect it here, but it is incredibly effective in the context of the ad. And most of it—perhaps all of
it—is never consciously noticed by the prospect. He simply realizes that he feels that a bargain is being offered to him.)
"If you will check your car's performance. . . and tell your

164

F O U R T H T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: R E D E F I N I T I O N

friends and neighbors about them . . ." (The introduction of a condition—an action you must perform—in order to get the nowlow price. Used before in the last chapter in a different context:
here we see how the same device works again to substantiate.
with equal power, the feeling of value.)
"prepared to do . . ." (Again the connotation of favor, of allowance, of discount.)
"You can have . . ." (Not, "You can buy." He is letting vou
have the plugs at the low price. Again, he is doing vou a favor.
You are getting a bargain.)
"only $1.49 each . . ." (The classic modifier. The tenth bargainphrase in these two paragraphs.)
Notice how similar Gradualization and Redefinition are. Notice how each operates below the surface of the conscious mind.
Gradualization by its structure—by its arrangement of facts and
phrases. Redefinition by its rearrangement of perspective.
Each is an extremely subtle and powerful wav of building
belief. Each deserves much more study than we can give it in
this book.
Let us now turn to some equally powerful but more apparent mechanisms that also build belief.

11
THE FIFTH TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: MECHANIZATION

How to Verbally Prove That Your
Product Does What You Claim
As we have observed repeatedlv,
good advertising copy exists simultaneously in two different places.
Part of that copy is words on a page. Or sounds carried by
radio waves. Or pictures and sounds coming out of a television set.
But the other part of that copy—the crucial part—takes place
in your prospect's brain. It is the series of reactions—planned reactions and anticipated reactions—that your copy causes in his
mind and his emotions.
Actually, when your prospect reads your copy, he is engaging in a silent dialogue with you. You are feeding him ideas and
images and emotions, in a planned pattern; and he is feeding
back to you reactions to these ideas and images and emotions.
You hope—you plan—that these reactions will be favorable.
165

Ibb

F I F T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

That they will be controlled reactions. That he will see the images you are projecting. That he will understand and agree with
the ideas that you are advocating. That he will share the emotions you are suggesting he feel, and even embellish and intensify them.
But also, at the same moment, vou must be aware of the
fact that—included among these reactions—are also a number of
inevitable anticipations, or demands, or questions on his part. And
you must answer these questions or vour copv will fail.
What are these demands he is going to make from time to
time on your copy? Basically they fall into three classes:
1. Demands for more information, more image, more desire. You have whetted his appetite; now you've got to satisfy it.
He is saying to vou: "Tell me more."
2. Demands for proof. He knows he wants it; now he wants
to know that it's true. He is telling you: "Oh veah? Who savs so?"
3. Demands for a mechanism. He knows he wants the end
result; now he wants to know how you're going to give it to him.
He is saying: "How does it work?"
To write good copv, you have to play a dual role. At the
same time, you have to be copywriter and prospect. You have to
develop an almost foolproof sensitivity to these inevitable reactions. You have to know the exact point that they are going to
come in. You have to anticipate them. You have to switch copv
direction, fill in the wanted material, at the precise point that
your prospect loses interest in one theme and demands the other.
This is one of the most difficult parts of writing copv, and
the exact spot where many good ads break down and lose their
prospect. And—since such anticipation points occur several times
in a single ad—you will find yourself working over the same paragraph of "unimportant" copy hour after hour. All vou know is
that at this point something went wrong—at this point vour
prospect is dissatisfied.
We will discuss these problems of copy direction . . . anticipation points . . . etc. in Chapter 14, on Interweaving. At this

F I F T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

167

point, however, let's look more eloselv at the third demand: the
demand for Mechanism.

Verbal Proof
This is the vital question: "Hoiv does it work0" Your prospect
is asking you here to give him a mechanism. He likes what vou
promise—he wants what vou promise—but he has to be convinced that your product can aetuallv give it to him.
You have to demonstrate vour product, in words, logically,
so that he can understand exactly H O W it gives him the end result you promise.
Since the beginning of advertising, of course, the eopv that
furnishes this information—that provides this mechanism—has
been called "Reason YVhv" copv. Claude Hopkins was its master.
But there have been few great selling ads of anv period that do
not use it to convince their prospect that their product actually
works.
In fact, the basic question vou must ask yourself, about this
device, when you sit down to write a piece of copy, is not, "Should
I use it?" Or "Should I build a mechanism into this copv?" But
simply: "How much?"
How much mechanism does this copv need? This, of course,
depends—as so many other things in vour cop}'—on the State of
Awareness of your prospect. Is he familiar with the mechanism
by which this product works? Does he accept it? If so, then this
part of your job is done for vou. Other advertisers have spent
their money to make this mechanism familiar to vour prospect.

Stage One: Name the Mechanism
You ma}' now take advantage of their investment bv simply
naming the mechanism, and going on to beat them with your
price or other features.
For instance, in the conventional camera ad, to back the

168

FIFTH TECHNIQUE OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

headline claim, all that you'd have to do is name your mechanisms, like this:
TAKE FOOLPROOF PHOTOS
WITH THE XENOPHON 1750
With Electronic Light Setter. . . Push-Button Zomar
Lens . . . Magazine Load . . . Only $135.
Here, the three mechanisms which insure the perfect pictures are simply named, and not described at all. The prospect
is already familiar with the way they work from the other ads he
has seen, and any further detailing of their nuts and bolts would
simply bore him. Therefore, you name them in as bold type as
possible, and go on to compete with your price.
Most catalog copy and retail copy needs to assume only this
abbreviated form. It deals with products which are already known,
and whose mechanisms are already understood and accepted.
Therefore, any further wordage on these points would only be
wasted.
But now we come to that vast array of products whose mechanism cannot simply be named. Why? For two basic reasons:
Stage Two: Describe the Mechanism
1. Because the prospect doesn't understand their mechanism
And
2. Because everybody else has the same mechanism, and the
same promise, and the same price. And the market is getting
tired, and you need a new way to compete.
Let's look at the simplest case—case #1—first:
Here your mechanism is not so well known, or not known
at all, and you can't simply name it. You have to go into more
detail; you have to describe it.
So you have the classic situation of Promise—Reason Whv.
You build a strong, quick promise—and then you follow up with
the reason why you can deliver that promise.

F I F T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

169

This one-two punch of promise and reason whv is as old as
advertising itself. Here, for instance, is how Rinso used it in 1926.
First thev give the promise, like1 this:
Who else wants a whiter wash—with no hard work?
How would vou like to see vour wash come out of
a simple soaking—whiter than hours of scrubbing could
make it!
Millions of women do it everv week. Thev've given
up washboards for good. ThevYe freed themselves forever
from the hard work and reddened hands of washdav.
Now thev just soak—rinse—and hang out to drv! In
half the time, without a hit ol hard rubbing, the wash is
on the line—whiter titan ever!
Notice how the original promise in the headline has been
taken and intensified in these first thi'ee paragraphs of copv. The
promise is repeated, in different words and from different perspectives, over and over again in those first three paragraphs.
But notice too that—as the copv builds desire—it also builds
a growing reaction on the part of the woman reading it. This reaction can be expressed in one word: "Hoic?" This promise sounds
better and better . . . it begins to sound too good to be true . . .
now she needs reassurance fast.
So the whiteness claims stop. The copv shifts direction—and
now begins to sell the mechanism, like this:
Dirt floats off—stains <jo.
The secret is simplv Rinso—a mild, granulated soap
that gives rich, lasting suds even in the hardest water.
Just soak the clothes in the ereamv Rinso suds—
and the dirt and stains float off. Rinse—and the wash is
spotless.
Even the most soiled parts need onlv a gentle rub between the fingers to make them snowv. Thus clothes last
longer, for there's no hard rubbing against a board.
Notice, first of all, that this mechanism—the suds that float
off dirt—is sold just as hard as the whiteness storv it is brought
in to prove. The first rule of mechanism copv is that it is not

170

F I F T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

scientific discourse. You must never allow it to become dull, or
merelv factual. You must load it with promise, load it with emotion. Every word in good copy—including mechanism copy—
sells. Only in these paragraphs, the copy is selling a secondary
claim (dirt floating off) that proves the primary claim (a whiter
wash). But still—it sells.
Secondly, of course, you'll immediately notice how simple
the mechanism is in this 1926 copy, as compared with the same
field today. In those days it was enough to mention the facts that
the suds floated off the dirt; the reader accepted, as an evident
truth, the fact that they would do so.
Today, of course, in our much more sophisticated and exploited market, she would no longer do so. Todav vou would need
far more mechanism. You would have to explain more, promise'
deeper, perhaps even invent a miracle ingredient to do the work
for vou.
Stage Three: Feature the Mechanism
Which brings us to case #2 and the difficult problem of what
to do when vour market is highly sophisticated . . . when promises sound alike . . . when price competition becomes suicidal?
This takes us back to Chapter 3, where we discussed marketsophistication from another perspective. Here we discovered that
mechanism—strong mechanism—saleable mechanism—is not onlv
a way to build belief, but may actually become so important to the
success of your product that you must put it into the headline.
These headlines are all mechanism headlines:
"FLOATS FAT RIGHT OUT OF YOUR BODY."
"FIRST WONDER DRUG FOR REDUCING."
"RUN YOUR CAR WITHOUT SPARK PLUGS."
"SHRINKS HEMORRHOIDS WITHOUT SURGERY."
"TOMMY ARMOUR SAYS SMACK HELL OUT OF
THE BALL WITH YOUR RIGHT HAND."

F I F T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

171

And hundreds more. Even/ one of them offers i/oti a new
way to get what i/ou've been wanting. A NEW7 WAY: a new mechanism; a new chance to satisfy your desire—even if everything
else vou've tried has failed vou.
Mechanism, therefore, can he inside vour ad, to prove vour
main claim, or on top of the ad. elevated bv the state of your
market to becoming the main claim.
If people assume that thev know how vour product works.
or if vour claim is so new that thev don't care, then all the mechanism you need can be summed up in a word or a phrase.
If people are not quite sure how it works, describe the mechanism—in selling language—until thev have enough reason-whv
to believe vou.
If you have, however, an exceptionally strong or dramatic
mechanism, or if you want to establish definite superiorih" to
other competing products, then sell hell out of that mechanism.
We'll see some expert examples of how to do this in our next
chapter, on Concentration- when we're sliown how to compare
your product with the rest of vour field.

On the Importance of Mechanism When You Want
to Convince Your Reader That You're
Giving Him a Bargain
One of the sad truths of our time—and profession—is that
our readers do not always beliexe the truth when we tell it to
them. Everv copy writer has had. at one time or another, a perfectly marvelous product that just couldn't be sold—because people
wouldn't believe that it could do what he knew it could do.
In the same way manv manufacturers, and their agencies,
are startled when thev cut a price—advertise the reduction—and
see no increase in sales.
What happened? No one believed them. A price cut—like
a product advantage—is only as good as vour words, and vour
strategy, makes it.

172

F I F T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

Price cuts must be justified. There must be a reason for
them. A mechanism behind them. Without such a mechanism—
without such a reason-why you should give this bargain—you are
going to get only a fraction of its real sales power.
The great master of price-cut mechanization was Robert Collier. His book—The Robert Collier Letter Book—is one of the
great classics of copvwriting know-how. Here is just one example
of how Collier made his price-cuts, not only believable, but
dramatic:
Before the Price Goes Up!
Dear Sir:
A short time ago one of the old, reliable mills that
makes the finer qualities of woven Madras for shirts began
sending out S.O.S. calls.
They had kept their plant going steadily for months,
thinking that the usual demand would easily take care of
their excess output.
But, with the weather so generally unseasonable, the
usual demand didn't materialize. And there thev were, heavily overstocked—and needing money.
If we would take all their surplus stock of the finer
grades of woven Madras, amounting to a quarter of a million yards, they offered to let us have them at wav below
any price we had ever paid for shirtings in all our years in
business—at far less than they could make the materials
and sell them for today.
We took them—the whole quarter-million yards—at a
tremendous savings in cost. . . .
A Bargain You May Never Get Again. . . .
Let me point out the difference between this logical.
carefully-prepared introduction to the price slash, and a simple.
bare announcement of that slash. Here, the copy writer not onlv
emphasizes bargain over and over again, but brings in qualiti/
as a counter-desire time after time. He thus uses a mechanism
within a mechanism: (1) the unseasonable weather causing (2 1
the factory to become overstocked resulting in the primary markdown—to build belief upon belief.

F I F T H T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: MECHANIZATION

173

Here the copv starts with the mechanism, and onlv goes into
the bargain claims six paragraphs later. Again, he has taken the
Creative Gamble: in this case, that he could hold the reader's interest for those six paragraphs. And. because of this gamble, lie
reaps ten times the believabilitv for e v e n word he said about the
bargain-value of his offer from that point on.

12
THE SIXTH TECHNIQUE
OF BREAKTHROUGH
COPY: CONCENTRATION

How to Destroy Alternate Ways for
Your Prospect to Satisfy His Desire
As vou know, in the final analysis,
no successful copy ever sells a product. It sells a way of satisfying a particular desire. And its power to sell ultimately comes
from the intensity of that desire.
If the desire is commercial—that is, if it is shared by masses
of people, and if each of these people want that satisfaction enough
to pay the price required for a mechanism to satisfy it—then it
is highly probable that many firms will try to deliver that mechanism, or product, to them.
The almost universal condition of commercial life is competition. No one who sells am'thing, of course, can avoid it. As you
write, one eye is fixed on your market, and the other on your
competitors.
We have described in this book several different ways of

176

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

beating competition. Let's stop for a moment and review them:
First, of course, is superiority of product. This is the ultimate weapon in the war for the consumers dollar. If you produce the best product, your advertising has a hundred times the
chance of success than if you produce only a fair product. Most
great ads have been associated with great products. Most great
copy claims come from the assembly line. If vours does not. if
your copy is better than your product, then send it to vour client
instead of your prospect, and tell him to make it a reality.
But even the best product needs equally as effective cop\
to induce people to try it. Otherwise, the excessive cost of getting the first purchase may drive the product off the market, before the repeat sales can build up high enough to earn- it through.
So we come to our second weapon to beat competition—superiority of promise. A stronger promise, that evokes more desire. A wider promise, that causes more people to buv. A more
believable promise, that brings in the skeptics as well as the susceptible. This entire book has been a blueprint for developing
such promises.
Third, we have the weapon of product-role. The role the
product allows its consumer to plav. The personality, the identification, the prestige, the status, the excitement vou can bring
out of your product, or graft onto it.
Fourth, we have response and reaction as a competitive
force—the ability to one-up the competition: to escalate claims
when necessary; to shift mechanisms; to invade new markets.
And fifth—the technique we will discuss in this chapter—is
direct attack.
Direct attack—the mechanism of Concentration— differs
completely from the other four methods we have discussed above.
All these techniques have the common element of ignoring the
competition. They concentrate on your storv, ,/our proniises^/o//;benefits, your product. They act as though'there is no other winpossible of gaining the satisfaction your prospect desires.
Therefore, they are most effective when vou dominate a

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

177

field, when vour primary problem is to protect your customers'
lovalty against the claims of your competitor, or when your story
is so powerful, so different, or so fresh that the competition has
nothing to match it. In these cases, it's better not to give him
the prestige of attack, not to mention his claims or his product,
even invidiously, in the space which costs you such a dear dollar.
But in many other cases—especially where your advertising
budget is much less than his—especially where the bulk of your
prospects are already customers of his—your first problem may
be to crack his image, to shatter their loyalty, before you can
rechannel their desire around to vou.
What Concentration Is
But this process of Concentration—this careful, logical, documented process of proving ineffectual other ways of satisfying
vour prospect's desire—is much more than mere attack. If you
can only attack another product—without showing at the same
time, by comparison, how your product provides what the other
lacks—then say nothing at all! Never attack a weakness unless
you can provide the solution to that weakness at the same time!
The reason for this is simple. Your prospect knows that your
attack is biased. If, therefore, you are attacking another product
onlv for your own good—in other words, to win the sale by disparaging your competitor—what you will probably evoke in his
mind is skepticism and dislike, and very little else.
But—and this is the critical point in this process—if you can
show your customer that this attack is for his own good, in his
sendee, because your product will eliminate this weakness, then
you have a sales story he will accept. Then you will make him
question even the most ingrained loyalty.
Concentration, therefore, is the process of pointing out weaknesses in the competition . . . emphasizing their disservice to your
prospect . . . and then proving to him that your product gives him
what he wants without them.

178

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: CONCENTRATION

Notice that all the techniques that we have developed in the
last few chapters are used here. Intensification to show the penalties of continuing with the old product. Gradualization to show
the logical cause of the weaknesses and how thev can now be
cured. Mechanization to prove that your product removes the
weakness. And so on.
Concentration is therefore a complicated process, taking up
sizable space to do its job properlv, and combining almost every
trick you have learned in this book. To see how incredibly effective it can be, however, let us look at two masterful examples.
The first is our spark plug ad again. As vou remember, in
the copy, the copy writer has told his prospect that he can run
his car without spark plugs, that he can get more gas mileage
and more power if he puts "fire injectors" into his car instead of
the old-fashioned plugs.
Now he goes on to:
1. Provide the mechanisms which prove his own claim; and
2. To destroy the prospect's confidence in plugs forever, in
this brilliant piece of interweaving copy:
MECHANICS AND ENGINEERS
READ THIS CAREFULLY
And for you mechanics and engineers let me tell vou
why fire injection must give vou these results.
A spark plug jumps a spark of electricity across an air
gap. This is the most wasteful and power consuming wav
to get electricity from one place to another and it limits
the size of the spark.
Afire injector fires on the surface of an electrical conductor This is the most efficient wav to get a big powerful spark into your cylinder.
On ordinary spark plugs the air gap between the electrode and the firing point is always getting bigger because
the electrode is always burning awav. This means vou have
misfiring which means loss of power plus wasted gas plus
raw gas to damage the cylinders and piston rings. On fire
injectors there is no air gap and no electrode to burn away.
That means maximum gas explosion which means full

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

179

power, full economy and no raw gas to wash away the oil
protection from cylinder walls and pistons.
A spark plug accumulates filth and carbon because oi
inefficient firing. This means vou need regular cleaning,
setting and expensive replacement!
A fire injector never needs cleaning or setting. It actually- "breaks in" and becomes more efficient with use. It
will actually outlast your car, delivering maximum efficiency
without servicing or replacement.
A spark plug gives you a thin skimpy spark that actually blows out under pressure of less than 120 pounds.
A fire injector gives you a heavy powerful flame that
will not blow out at pressures far heavier than those created bv even the highest compression engine. . . .
With ordinary spark plugs you are using, or should
he using premium gas which costs from 4 to 8 cents more
than ordinary gas, and despite this you're getting inefficient, wasteful gas consumption.
With fire injectors regular gas will give you up to 8
more gas miles per gallon, up to 31 more horsepower, plus
easier starting in all weather. Add these savings together
and see for yourself whv I sav that fire injectors will pay
for themselves every single month that you drive your car.
Ordinary spark plugs have to he replaced regularly.
In some of the new high-compression cars, a set of plugs
will burn up in a couple of months.
Afire injector installation is guaranteed for the life of
your car without cleaning, servicing, or replacing.
These are some of the reasons that the U.S. Air Force
pays premium prices for surface supported injectors for
their aircraft and why vou will ultimately find fire injectors in all automobiles. . . .

Let's See How He D o e s It
I hope that by now you have spotted many of the techniques
he uses to gain his effects . . . to build the overall power of this
sequence. Let's just check off a few of them right now:
First, of course, is the interweaving contrast. A weakness in
the operation of the spark plug is pointed out, and then immedi-

180

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: CONCENTRATION

ately counteracted by the benefit the injector gives you. Bad—
good; bad—good; bad—good: this is the underlying structure of
this sequence.
But this is only one use he makes of parallelism. He repeats
words to contrast the inherent weakness of the plug with the inherent strength of the injector. "A spark plug jumps a spar*.
"Afire injector fires on. . . . " Spark is a weak word; fire is much
stronger visually And he later intensifies this contrast of image
by saying: "A spark plug gives you a thin skimpy spark.
against "A fire injector gives you a heavy, powerful flame "
You can picture the difference.
Throughout the copy, definition and re-definition take place.
Spark firing is the "most wasteful and power consuming way" as
opposed to "the most efficient way to get a big powerful spark."
Misfiring means "loss of power plus . . . ," while maximum gas explosion means full power, full economy. . . ." (Notice the parallel
sentence structure here sharpening the contrast.)
And, in a beautiful image, the fire injector actuallv "breaks
in"—a masterpiece of redefinition by analogy.
Of course, almost every benefit has its documentary- mechanism. The air gap in ordinary plugs gets bigger "because the
electrode is burning away." The spark plug gets dirtv "because of
inefficient firing." And so on.
Let me point out again the general structure of this sequence
It is:
*
Bad.
Good.
Bad.
Good.
Bad.
Good.
And so on. It thus offers repeated, direct, one-for-one contrast. It explores a number of performance factors of vital interest in the prospect—showing the bad and then the good side of
each of them.

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

181

A Second Strategy
This is one way of accomplishing your Concentration. But,
of course, it is not always feasible, because the points you wish
to contrast mav not be so easily and clearly broken down, one
bv one. You may be dealing, instead, with a time sequence—a
recurring, unpleasant experience with which the prospect is familiar, and which you wish to sharpen before you provide him
with the antidote.
In this case your Concentration copy would adopt a different structure. Something that looks more like this:
What happens to you now. with the product or products you
are using presentlv.
What will happen when vou switch to the new product.
Here is such a structure, for an ad selling a reducing pill.
Let's look first at the negative copy:
For years doctors have known that ordinary reducing
plans—that vou pay S5, $10 and even 815 for in the stores—
are completely passive! That they depend strictly on your
own will power—on vour ability to starve that fat off your
bodv. All that these ordinary reducing plans are able to
give' vou . . . for vour $5 or 810 or S15—are HUNGERAPPEASING PRODUCTS—pills, powders and liquids that
do nothing more than swell up in your stomach—that do
nothing more than "dull" your hunger a little.
But not one of these products could do anything to
ACTIVELY help you reduce your weight. To take the strain
off that starvation diet. To actually help vou BURN UP
that uglv fat. . . OXIDIZE that fat. . . MELT IT AWAY—
FOREVER!
So what happened? If you were overweight, you struggled to do the job of reducing BY YOURSELF! You took
vour hunger-appeasing pills religiously. You pushed away
the foods vou love. You spent week after week of torture.
And finally, if vou were lucky; you carved off 5, 10, or even
12 precious pounds.
And then your will power snapped! You broke your
terrible diet. You discovered that your little pills were use-

182

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

less to keep you away from the foods vou loved. And the
fat flowed back—heavier and uglier and more deadhj than
ever before!
Again, let's glance at the means the writer used to get his
b
total effect.
In the first and second paragraphs—Definitions and Redefinition. Ordinary reducing plans are passive. They depend on vour
own will power. They can do nothing to actively bum up fat.
And in the third paragraph, the equating of taking ordinarv
reducing pills with "doing the job of reducing yourself."
^ Next, logic—cause and effect. Given the acceptance of these
definitions by the reader, the third and fourth paragraphs become
a logical necessity. This tone of cause and effect is conveved in
the phrase: "So what happened?"
Now, of course, the third and fourth paragraphs condense
an experience which is all too common to everv woman who has
ever tried to reduce. She has lived through this herself, time after
time. She recognizes each of the symptoms. And so she finds herself nodding her head, agreeing with each in its turn, building
up a stream of acceptances which carries more and more conviction as she finds her own experiences more and more thoroughly described.
And then, at the climax, in the last line of the fourth paragraph, the destniction of the old methods of reducing is complete.
Notice the use of the word "And" to tie this final indictment in
structurally with the stream of sensory experiences that have gone
before it. There is no doubt that the fat has come back again in
this woman's life—if it hadn't, she wouldn't have read this much
of the ad. But here the inevitable implication buried in a sentence
with which no woman could disagree—is that it icas the failure
of the pills that caused the failure of the diet.
Thus the stage is set for the hero-product to emerge. It has
already been foreshadowed in the second paragraph—in the negative accusations that these ordinary methods can do nothing
"actively" to "burn awav" fat.

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

183

Now the copv goes on, from failure to promise, like this:
And so vou tried another passive plan. And another.
And another. And then if vou were like the men and women
whose fantastic case histories w ere reported by leading medical journals—perhaps vou went to vour doctor and asked
him for an easy way out—without torture—and without
sliding hack!
These doctors had the answer in a tiny grey pill—and
a common-sense plan.
In their hands—so tinv that thev could balance it on
the tip of their little finger—was perhaps the greatest
weapon ever discovered against deadlv, excess fat. It was
a miraculous compound called LECITHIN—brandnew—whose amazing fat-dissolving properties had been
discovered bv a Nobel prize winner—the co-discoverer
of insulin. . . .
Because this product was perfectly safe—and as easy
to take as an aspirin—main had used it themselves when
they wanted to lose weight. . . .
Thev were not given am starvation diets . . . thev never
experienced a single hungry moment . . . they reported, in
case after case, that thev felt more pep. more energy, more
youth and vitality than thev had known in years!
And then, dav after dav faster and easier and safer
than thev had ever known before, the ugly excess fat around
their bodies melted awav! While thev were eating three delicious meals a dav, thev were shedding as much as 5 pounds
a week. While thev were feasting on mouth-watering
steaks. . . .
And so on. Right back into Intensification copy, with its strong
picture-image sell.
Here are vour contrast—vour mechanization—your documentation—your reference to authority—and then your return to
promise, in the form of case history, which now has many times
its original power, based on both the elimination of alternate channels of fulfillment, and the strong supporting mechanism which
documents its claims.

184

SIXTH T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CONCENTRATION

One Final Word on Concentration
I have purposely chosen extreme examples to illustrate each
mechanism. These copy blocks are longer than Concentration
need logically be. The same effect may be boiled down into two
or three sentences, or even a single phrase, as in this classic
headline:
"SHRINKS HEMORRHOIDS WITHOUT SURGERY."
Here is contrast—implied weakness in other products—compensating promise in vour own.
Again, it is not the content, nor is it the length of copy used
in a mechanism that makes it effective. It is simply and solelv
the problem it solves for you in the development of your copy—
by the emotional reaction it produces on your reader when he
encounters it.
If, in this case, vou have caused him to question a habit . . .
shift a lovalty . . . take a chance on your product—you have done
your job, no matter how few or how many words vou have used
to do it.

13
THE SEVENTH
TECHNIQUE OF
BREAKTHROUGH COPY:
CAMOUFLAGE

How to Borrow Conviction for Your Copy
We have now discussed five separate wavs to build believabilitv into vour copv. I do not think
we should leave this subject without at least mentioning one other,
entirely different, approach—that oi borrowing believabilitv from
all the places in our society where it is stored up.
The process bv which vou do this is quite simple. As vou
know, people do not bin' a newspaper, or a magazine, or anv
other medium of communication for its ads at all. They buv this
publication—or thev turn on their radio and television set—to
keep in touch icith the world around them; to learn what's happening, and whv it's happening. To be entertained, or enlightened, or simplv kept up to date.
Now, when a person chooses one of the publications (and
for a moment we'll disregard radio and television), he does so
because he believes that that publication is telling him the truth.
He has faith in that publication. He believes in it.
185

186

SEVENTH T E C H N I Q U E O F B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

And, as long as he has faith in that publication (as any space
buyer can tell you) it remains an excellent medium for advertising—because some of his trust carries over from the editorial
pages to the advertising pages. He simply assumes that his publication wouldn't carry the ad if it weren't true.
And, on the other hand, when he loses faith in that publication, the effectiveness of its advertising just goes to pieces. If
he no longer believes in the publication, he won't believe in the
advertising it carries. This factor—the believability in the medium
itself—I think is a far more important consideration in buying
space than mere circulation.
All this is of vital interest to the space buyer, of course, but
we have to go a step further. You see, not only does this reader
come to believe in the publication which he buys repeatedly, but
after a while he becomes used to receiving his tmth couched in
the style and format and phraseology of that particular publication.
In other words, a conditioned reflex has been formed here.
The man believes in the publication. The publication phrases its
material in a certain way. After a while, that phraseology begins
to carry an aura of truth all by itself no matter what material
it embraces.
Thus, you have waiting for your ad—if it is adapted the right
way—a stored believability. A believability reflex. Which you can
tap by adopting this particular publication's phraseology when you
address its audience.
Let's Look at a Few Examples
I'll try to show you the three different ways you can borrow
this built-up believability:
First, of course, and most obvious, is Format. Each publication has its own look. You have your copy. Your job is to merge
both of them into a combination that will:
1. Allow the reader to enter into your ad with the least
possible mental shifting of gears from "editorial" to "advertisement."

SEVENTH T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

Vr> I

2. Carrv along the greatest possible amount of believability
through every sentence of the ad.
I have not discussed layout in this book, because I do not believe layout is nearly as effective as copy in determining the results of your ad. Here, however, layout is important. A single change
in format can add 50% to your readership, and your results.
Your job here, once again, is to approximate as closely as
possible the format of the medium in which you are advertising.
This means, ideally, letting them set vour ad . . . using their kind
of headline-to-body-copy transition . . . using their illustrations,
their sub heads, their break-up of space.
On the following pages are two ads for the same book on
handling people. The first is an all-purpose, house-set magazine
ad that was shotgunned over twelve or fifteen media. It was mildly
successful.
The second is the same ad. adapted feature for feature for
the Wall Street Journal. It was enormously successful—so much
so that it has been repeated i at the time of this writing) nineteen times, once a month, with no drop-off in pull.
Let's look at the changes that give this adapted format such
continued believability:
1. The headline, set by the journal in journal type. There
is no difference between this old-fashioned, upper-and-lower-case
headline and any other headline in the editorial content of this
issue. Therefore, it does not immediately signal the reader: "This
is an ad: beware!" To have made it bolder, or more modern, or
in all caps, would simply diminish its effectiveness.
2. The sub headlines—two of them, one following directly
on the other. Verv Nineteenth Century, really. Abandoned years
ago by 99% of all American newspapers. But the Journal uses it,
and therefore the ad uses the same treatment. And the very fact
that it is so unusual, and so old-fashioned, makes its adaptation
that much more belief-carrying in this context.

1S9

190

SEVENTH T E C H N I Q U E OF BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFL A(.I

3. The two bars directly above and below the first sub head
One of those small touches that defines individualitv. The ac
would lose some of its atmosphere without them. And atmosphere (believabilitv, trust) is what you're seeking with these
adaptations.
4. The placement of subheads to the extreme left of the column. Another minute detail. Bad lavout according to the a^encx
art director. But again, in perfect harmony with the format of
the editorial content.
5. The line drawing of the author. An uglv rendering. Far
less attractive than the photograph of the same man in the magazine ad. And yet the Journal does not use photographs of the
men they picture in their editorial columns. And so this ad must
do the same, even at the cost of harrowing screams of pain from
its authors (until they see their rovaltv checks).
Thus, what has been done by these adaptations, is that a
corny, old-fashioned, rather ugly advertisement has been developed for this specific medium—which has about twice the believability, twice the pulling power, and twice the staving power
of the same exact copy and illustration presented the massproduced wav.
Is it worth the extra cost? Yes. Should it be done for each
important medium in turn? Yes.
Why? Because in so doing, you are tapping the ingrained
trust that the reader has for each medium in turn, and channeling at least part of it, unconsciously, onto vour product.
This, then, is the first method of borrowing this built-in believability: adopting format.

The Second Way to Borrow Believabilitv
The second—slighth- less specific—is adopting phraseology.
This method stems from the fact that certain media, or classes
of media, use certain stereotyped phrases over and over again,
which after a while take on a believabilitv of their own.

S E V E N T H T E C H N I Q U E O F BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

191

In newspapers, to take the most obvious example, there is
usually an issue date, a city of origin, and perhaps a by-line. Each
of these news-indicators may be picked up by the copv writer to
add believability to his opening, as in this extremely successful
example:
SKIN SPECIALIST DEMONSTRATES

HOW TO RINSE AWAY YOUR BLACKHEADS
Bv Claire Hoffman
New York, N.Y.—A leading doctor today
showed an audience of men. women and skintroubled teenagers how to clean oily skin and
shrink enlarged pores with a lO-minute home medical treatment he has perfected. . . ."
And so on. The news tone has been set by the opening phrases.
The entire remainder of the copy has been given the atmosphere
of a report rather than a sales story by these first few sentences.
The same principle can be used for each of the other classes
of media vou employ. In direct mail, look for the key correspondence your prospect receives that are opened instantly
without exception. Some examples would be refund checks, government correspondence, dividend notices, confidential reports,
high-priced newsletters, etc.
In radio and TV, adopt the news format and the news phraseology'. Even, if possible, adopt the news "sound"—the clipped
phrase of the newscaster, the insider tone of the analyst, the documentary feel of the news, hand-held camera.
Study the channels of communication that people believe in.
Adopt their tone, their feel, their style, their sincerity. Make your
ads blend in, so there is no jarring transition. Camouflage them.

Believability-Borrowing Strategy #3
In a later chapter, we'll deal with mood directly. However,
as the last method of borrowing believability, I want to mention

192

SEVENTH T E C H N I Q I E OK BHKAKTIIROl•(;H COPY: CAMOl IT,A(.l

two mood adaptations that rightly belong j„ this discussion.
We've seen that you borrow vour publications format and
your publications phraseology or stvle. These two methods ol
adding confidence to your copy depend directly on the particular medium you are using at am particular moment.
You pick up that publications appearance and idiom, as it
were, because people have come to contrast that editorial manner of presentation with ••advertising language" in general and
because they automatically trust the first, and automatically approach the second with an ingrained skepticism.
In other words, advertising language, which is .mite naturalK
biased language and emotionally-charged language, tends to produce a counter-reaction in its prospects bv its verx appearance.
To overcome this instant and automatic skepticism—besides
borrowing our host publications idiom—we also have two other
idioms which allow us to escape the -hard-sell" stereohpe.
The first is Understatement. Simplicity. A lack'of color
words. Fewer adjectives than the reader would expect \o superlatives. Short sentences, that fall rather than rise in tone at
their end.
For example, take any Volkswagen ad. Count the number of
nouns per sentence, and compare it to the number of adjectives
See how the ad kids itself—never takes itself too seriously Notice how it makes its point quietly, and them stops. Even how the
extremely short, extremely simple- sentence structure adds to the
reeling of sincerity.
Here is a complete Volkswagen ad. which features one superiority of the car over competitive models. Could ,,ou have told
the storv as well, ex-en if you used ten times as many words?
You never run out of air
You also won't have am worries about draining or
Hushing the radiator in spring. Then- is no radiator. "
Or hoses.
Or water pump.
Or rust.

S E V E N T H T E C H N I Q U E OE BREAKTHROUGH COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

193

And so there are no worries about anti-lreeze in the
fall or cracked blocks in the winter.
If vou feel that vou owe vour Volkswagen engine a
little something special every spring and fall, you can do
this much.
Just run it once around the block and let it air itself out.
This is great copv because of its simplicity and its image and
its sell, all of which interact to give a very powerful argument to
anvone looking for a new car.
Also, I'd suggest that vou study any of the old Claude Hopkins ads, or John E. Kennedy if'rom the old Lord & Thomas days)
to get the same power of sincerity without the limiting whimsy.
Or the great radio and TV pitches of the Fifties.
There is little advertising being written this way, and its very
raritv makes it even more effective. It will not solve every selling problem, but where it is effective—especialh* in continuous
campaigns—it is very effective indeed.
The second mood vou mav employ to break away from the
"advertising" stereorvpe is what 1 call Deadly Sincerity. This is
the technique of leaning over backwards to point out the flaxes
in an offer, so that the benefits, when you bring them in, will be
believed that much more deeply.
Since this is not done in ordinary advertising—since ordinary copv does not knock its product as well as praise it—it carries great emotional impact, especially in highly-competitive fields.
Here is an example, for a book on getting ahead on your
job, which had to run after a hundred books on the same subject had already appeared in the same publication:
TO THE MAN WHO WILL SETTLE FOR NOTHING
LESS THAN THE PRESIDENCY OF HIS FIRM
And who is willing to make the incredible sacrifices
necessary to get there in the shortest possible time.
Here is the most realistic handbook ever written for
vou—and vou alone.

LU4

S E V E N T H T E C H N I Q U E OF B R E A K T H R O U G H COPY: CAMOUFLAGE

This is a private advertisement.
It is not meant for ninety-nine men out of everv hundred. These men do not have the drive—the impossible
pride—the absolute compulsion to succeed that this advertisement demands . . .
And so on. You can see immediately, in the first few paragraphs of this ad, how the tone of utter frankness is set. The use
of such "non-advertising phraseology" as "incredible sacrifice". . .
"impassible pride". . . "absolute compulsion". . . "this advertisement demands" set the ad off from the others around it—give it
an air of unpredictability that induces the reader to go on.
In our next chapter when we discuss Reinforcement, we shall
see how this tone of complete fairness, and even criticism, can
make a comparatively minor claim take on immense emotional
impact. But for now it is sufficient to point out that this is one
more way to break out of the hard-sell stereotype, and gain almost the same type of believability that would be given to a factual report.

14
THE FINAL TOUCHES

Let's now review what we've done
up to this point, and the last few problems that we have to consider.
We started this book with the idea that there was a definite
technique that could produce better headlines than the ones you
were using yesterday. And. since the headline is so vitally important to the success or failure of vour ads, we devoted the first
part of our book to this creative search.
Then, in the second part, we investigated the equally important problem of how to exploit that headline. How to lead the
prospect from the feeding of interest and curiosity that your headline had aroused in him, into a constantly mounting conviction
that this product has what he wants, and that it is absolutely capable of giving it to him.
You use body copy to accomplish this second objective—
perhaps a lot of it, perhaps very little. In either case, we've
examined the three interlocking paths by which this effective
demand is created: first, the intensification of desire; then the
creation of an acceptable product personality- or role with which
195

196

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

the prospect will want to identify; and then the rather abstract
structure underlying your copy arrangement that produces believability of vour story.
So now we Ye seen how to reach out to your prospects mind
on all three emotional lex-els: Desire . . . Identification . . . and
Belieyabilirv.
Now, as our last problem, we have to put all tliese elements
together. We haxe to take all these promises, these images, these
devices, these structures—and weave them together into one cohesive unit, that holds your prospect's attention from beginning
to end.
In other words, having broken down the ad to analyze the
elements that make it work—we now have to deal with the reverse problem: tying it together once again.
We have several additional devices that help us do this. We Ye
already touched on them in passing in previous chapters. Now
let's examine them more closely see what makes them operate.
formalize them into working rules. Like this:

Verification—How to Offer Authorities and Proof
Now, of course, comes the most obvious kind of believability copy. Your proof: your statistics; your tests; vour testimonials:
your authorities; vour trends; vour documentation; vour seals of
approval; your awards won. Any fact at all that vou can use, anywhere in the copy, to show that your product does what vou saxit does.
The key words here are anyichere in your copy. Because, as
I hax-e tried to shoxv in the last four chapters, the placement of
your proof is as important to its overall effect as the content itself.
I can't tell you anything about gathering proof that xour oxxn
research department doesn't knoxv a hundred times better. Or, if
you have no research department, that good hard digging won't
give you.
There are no special rules to phrasing proof—except, perhaps,

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

1^'

to keep it as short as possible, as dramatic as possible, as specific
as possible.
And, above all. remember that proof copy, like every other
word in vour ad, is selling copy. It cannot merely offer proof
alone. It must offer the kind of proof that makes the prospect
hungry to read everv word of it. and it must make him want the
product more and more at the end of every line.
Fine. But the next question is: where do you place the proof
in your ad? At what point or points will it be most effective?
And, next, how manv different proofs or tests or testimonials or what have vou should you include in the ad? When do you
put them in. and when (if ever' do you leave them out? When
do thev make the ad too heavy? When do they make it dull 0
When do thev make it too much to be believed?
We have been discussing these questions, though not in this
context, for the last four chapters. For the last four chapters we
have been discussing the placement and structure of claims, of
promises. We have found that the more you prepare for those
claims, and the more agreeable vou have made your reader to
accepting them, the more powerful they become.
The same exact rules hold for vour proof. Proof—like claims—
is most effective ichen the reader unconsciously demands it, and
when he is reach/ to accept its content as necessary and logical.
This is the rule. As simple and concrete as this. All the rest
is application.
We've gone over, quite carefullv, the four processes that determine position in vour ad. They are, once again:
1. Gradualization—the development of a stream of acceptances from vour reader to vour statements, leading finally to an
inevitable demand on the part of that reader for your product.
2. Redefinition—the removal of preconceived objections on
the part of vour prospect toward your product, by providing him
with a new definition of that product.
3. Mechanization—the verbal proof that your product
works—that it does what vou sav it does.

198

THK FINAL T O U C H E S

4. Concentration—the verbal proof that other alternate pre
rod
nets do not do this essential function as well.
Now, every one of these processes is effective, not onlv in
increasing the believability of vour claims, but also in increasing
the believabilitv of vour proof.
And, in exactly the same wav, in everv one of these processes, there is a place for your proof to appear where it will do
twice as much good for your copy as it would aimvhere else.
For example, go back and look at the Concentration copv in
the spark plug ad that we analvzed in Chapter 12. Here was a
point-after-point comparison of the weaknesses of spark plugs
contrasted with similar strengths in fire injectors.
At the end of this sequence, the writer had built up tremendous believability. He could have done manv things with that
believability. He could have switched it into an immediate restatement of his main claims. He could have channeled it directly into asking for the order. He could have gone into a monev
back guarantee, etc.
Instead, he chose to pile proof upon believabilitv in this wav:
"These are some of the reasons that the U.S. Air Force pai/s
premium prices for surface supported injectors for their aircraft . . . ."
And, in so doing, strengthens the power of both the believability copy that went before, and the authoritv-reference that
now follows.
Thus, and we'll take this up in greater detail in the Reinforcement section that follows, in copy 1 + 1 can often equal 10.
By adding one powerful piece of copv—at preeiselv the right moment—to another, you can get an overall effect far greater than
these two pieces of copy would ever produce, if thev were just
spread out all over the page.
Position increases power. We continue to find new examples
ot this ever\- time we explore another copv process.
And how about the other three processes? How does vour
proof interact with them?

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

199

Well, take Gradualization. Study the TV Repair Manual ad
again. Notice the exact point that the '"manufacturers test rooms"
are brought into the copy—at the very moment that the reader
is begging for some sort of solution to the problems that the copy
has intensified over and over again.
Here, at this point, the reader is searching for an answer.
Here the exact same proof which might be merely dull statistics
if it were presented earlier, suddenly takes on a sharpened drama—
because the reader now is fully aware of its importance, and is
ready to explore every word.
Again, I must repeat that the main problem with documentation is that it is inherently dull. Your job, therefore, is to add
excitement to it. You have to stage it. You have to develop a
drama, in your readers mind, into which your documentation enters as the hero. In which statistics suddenly become charged
with emotion—because you've made them the solution to whatever stands between your reader and the satisfactions that he
craves.
I could go on, and give examples of the interaction of proof
and each of the remaining mechanisms, but I think you would
gain far more bv doing it yourself. Instead, let me sum up by
saying this:
Documentation is any sort of proof—statistics, facts, tests,
etc.—that your product works.
Mechanization on the other hand (in case there may be a
confusion in your mind) is the verbal and logical demonstration,
and thus also proof, that vour product works. Mechanization does
not necessarily have to incorporate any outside documentation at
all to prove its point—it does this on the strength of its logic and
its structure alone.
Verification—which is different from both of them—is the
process of arranging your documentation within your copy so that
it gains the greatest immediate acceptance from your reader, and
has the greatest emotional effect on him.
Thus, I would suggest that you stop thinking of placing your

z u u

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

documentation only in the headline of vour ad, or in the subhead, or in a separate box labelled. "Here's Proof."
I would suggest instead that you start thinking of documentation as one more element (along with promises, belief-words.
momentum-builders, image-sharpeners, emotion-definers, and all
the rest which we'll explore before we finish) to be interwoven
together, side by side—so that, combined, thev give vou far greater
emotional power and believabilitv than anv one of them could
separately.

Reinforcement—How to Make Two
Claims Do the Work of Four
The first rule of all copy, of course, is that it produce an
emotional impact. As we have seen, over and over again, even in
believabilitv copy, even in documentation, every icord must carry
image, picture, feeling.
Now. the wonderful thing about emotional writing, of which
copy is one form, is this: That if you employ it skillfully, then the
impact of one emotion, plus the impact of a second emotion, will
often add up—non-mathematically—to the impact of FOUR
emotions.
In mathematics, one plus one alwavs equals two—never more.
In emotional writing, one plus one can often equal ten. In other
words, two emotional images, joined together in the right waycan often have TEN TIMES the impact that either of these images has hi) itself.
For example, in the classic Avis campaign, the main theme
was "We try harder." Good by itself; but nowhere near as powerful as it became when it was reinforced by the reason why Avis
tries harder: "We're only second."
These two separate ideas: (1) We're second; (2) Therefore.
we try harder.—when they are combined, take on a joint impact
far greater than you could ever logically expect if vou simply examined each one of them by itself.
In fact, we can even define one type of creativity as the

T1IK FINAL TOVCHKS

201

ahiliitj to combine separate images into a new uiiiti/ that is much
more powerful than the mere logical sum of Us parts.
This is how new words are horn. As well as new phrases.
slogans, concepts, ideas. And. ot course, headlines.
Your job—and it's a tough one is to do just this, image bv
image, throughout the entire !>od\ cop\ ol vonr ad.
For example, in the ad lor "the man who will settle for nothing less than the presidency ol his firm'' that we quoted in the
last chapter, this sequence occurs:
This is John Horn's first book, lie is not an accomplished writer, and it has Haws. II \OII read tor stvle. or for
literarv quality this is not \oiir book.
Bui there are jxirajraphs in liu\ hook—ideas in this
hook—whole chapters i>i this lnuik licit in here nerer seen
put down on paper liejore' \ud dial mai/ open doors to
(/on—tomorrow—thai olhrru i\< might take a lifetime of
waiting for i/ou to walk through!
Notice how the startling frankness of the first paragraph,
which goes out of its wav to call the reader's attention to flaws
in its product, serves as an intensifying contrast to the positive
claims of the second paragraph- -making them far more believable and therefore far more powerful to the reader who is now
convinced that he is receiving a fair report on this book.
It is the juxtaposition ol these two paragraphs—one following right on top of the other-- that makes their combination so
effective.
Copvwriting. in nianv phases, is the search for such juxtapositions. The last five chapters have been full of examples of
them. I suggest that vou go back and read these examples again,
and underline the combination points—and junctures—where one
claim blends into another, and either sharpens it, pours strength
into it. or makes it more believable.
So. one wav vou tie vour ad together is to constantly build
one claim on top of another— -alwavs seeking to make each stronger
and more believable bv the combination.

202

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

This same principle applies in a smaller way in our next
device.
Interweaving—How to Blend Emotion, Image and
Logic Into the Same Sentence
Let me mention at this point a thought that has probably
occurred to you several times over the past few chapters:
The big trouble with analysis of the kind we've been doing
in the second part of this book is that after a while it begins to
sound quite mechanical. You've probably thought that I'm suggesting that you abandon any kind of creative flow, and work like
a sort of phrase-carpenter. Here you put in a promise; there vou
nail on a believability sentence; then cover both of them with a
good strong identification.
This is what it sounds like because it takes so long to identify each one of these devices and show vou how to work them.
Because of this need for analysis—which always requires that vou
cut individual elements out of the "life-flow" of a growing ad—
it sounds like you should actually be conscious of each device as
you are using it to write that ad—even going so far as to name
the device as vou weave it in.
I don't think I have to tell you that this mechanical approach
is not my idea, and that it won't work. What I'm trying to do is
exactly the same procedure that a golf pro uses when he wants
to improve your game. He doesn't just let you go out and plav.
He stops you, makes you notice your hands, rationalize your grip.
shift your fingers, get used to the new feel of the club as you lift
it this new way, and then take a few practice swings—all at the
same time that he's telling you why you're doing it this way.
When you're swinging for the first few times, this new wav.
you feel pretty awkward, and you're conscious of everv muscle
in your arms. That's why he has you keep swinging—through one
bucket. . . two buckets . . . ten buckets of balls.
Pretty soon, though, those arm muscles are going to feel
comfortable in that new swing. And you're going to lose your

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

203

conscious awareness of them. At that point, what was mechanical before becomes intuitive now. But it's a new kind of intuition—far more, skillful and effective than you had before.
This is the kind of intuition I'm trying to build in vou. I'm
trying to take you from Creatix itv #1 to Creativity #2. Both are
intuitive states, where you write from the full depths of vour
emotions as well as your mind, and when 1 vou are no more conscious of the mechanisms and devices that vou are employing to
gain your effects, than you are of the movements of vour fingers
on the typewriter kevs.
But, to get you from State #1 to State #2. 1 have to bring
all these details to consciousness—and make vou awkward in a
new and more effective wav than vou were when vou first learned
to write copy—so that you can take these insights and techniques
and bury them inside your own talent—so that vou can automatically employ them, without thinking about them at all. when
vou want to express most powerfully vour ideas, vour emotions
and vour sales philosophy.
This whole process of "New Awkwardness leading to NewAbility" is seen quite clearly in the very simple technique of Interweaving, which I learned from a brilliant man bv the name of
Walter S. Campbell.
Every copy writer should read Campbell's book, Writing NonFiction (The Writer, Inc., 1961). In the next chapter I'll list other
books you should have. But this is certainly one of the important ones that you can probably master in a weekend.
Campbell is talking about reporting and not copy writing,
but the structural principles are the same. He savs that even
in the most factual reporting, no sentence can be effective if it
contains only the facts alone. It must also contain emotion,
evaluation, impact—if those facts are to be given meaning and
importance to the reader.
The same is true for every sentence you write of copy. That
sentence should contain not only promise . . . not only image
not only logic—but as much of all three as possible.

204

THE FINAL TOl'CIII>

Weave together your promise, vour logic, vonr emotion, vour
image. Pack vour sentences full of every one of them. Make them
blend into each other, till its almost impossible to pull out the
individual threads of the rich pattern of conviction and desire
vou're weaving.
For example, go back to the fire injector ad in Chapter 12.
and see how promise is interwoven in e v e n sentence of the believabilitv copy where the injectors are being contrasted with the
old-fashioned plugs. In these two sentences, for instance:
"With ordinary spark plugs you are using, or should he using
premium gas (disadvantage) which costs from 4 to 8 cents more
than ordinary gas (disadvantage), and despite this (disadvantage
you're getting inefficient (disadvantage), wasteful (disadvantage 1
gas consumption (disadvantage)."
Ill this first sentence, which is part of a logical sequence offered as proof of superiority through comparison of performance
characteristics, the copv writer has managed to insert six
disadvantage-images for the reader to remember the next time
he considers buying ordinary plugs.
Now the copv writer goes on to his contrasting sentence
about the injectors:
"Willi fire injectors regular gas (promise) will give i/ou up
to 8 miles more per gallon (promise), up to 31 more horsepower
(promise), plus easier starting (promise) in all weather (promise)."
Five promises in this second sentence. The packing in of
image upon image to build an overwhelming effect.
Or, as an even more complicated example, involving the interweaving of almost everv copv element in the book, let's look
at this sentence:
"And, most important, (a mood-builder, indicating the value
to the reader of the promises which are about to follow) these
experts (reference to authority to build believabilitv) liave discovered (more believabilitv through the use of the scientific
idiom) that i/ou do not have to he a handyman (the core-promise 1

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

2()o

or « mcc/wmr (restatement of the core-promise) in order to
coax (promise of ease) this performance (promise, condensing
all the claims of superior reception that have already been detailed in the previous copy) out of i/our set."
Now, is this done consciously 1 /Not at all. But the copy writer
knew the principle of i n t e r n e t in-r . . . |1U(I experimented with it
before . . . and had it stored axvax in Ins unconscious as one more
tool to be used—intuitiyely-to urain the effect he wanted, at the
exact moment he needed it.
Try it yourself. See how mam different emotions you can
pack into a single sentence . . . paragraph . . . sequence. See how
much richer and more powerful xour cop\ becomes. How much
more you can say in the same space. H.m xou be-m to build reinforcement-multiplied i m p a c t - i n t o more and more of your
copy

S e n s i t i v i t y - H o w to Give Your Reader What He D e m a n d s
Step In Step Throughout the Copy
Now; if you continue to pile promise upon promise, identification upon identification, documentation upon documentation element upon element, where do you stop, Where does it become
too much? Where does the reader become satiated or bored and
want to go on to a new image or new promise, or even the close?
At what point are you starting to oversell? How do uou catch
yourself, and switch off?
We have already touched on this problem before in Chapter 11. I suggest that vou reread that discussion now. even though
we re going to expand on it at this point.
Here you are reiving on your own powers of empathy You
must be, at the same time, not only the writer of your ad but
its reader. You must anticipate that point in the copy flow-- as it
is transformed into a series of impressions in your readers m i n d where he is going to sax-: "I've read enough about this. Give me
this instead."

206

T H E FINAL TOUCHED

And then vou must shift the direction of the copv to meet
his new direction of interest.
In other words, what we are talking about now is the overall structure of your ad. Not a sentence, or a paragraph, or a sequence: but the architecture of the ad as a ichole.
Every ad has an architecture, as I'm sure YOU know. This is
the over-all pattern of the ad, including when and where and how
mam- times you shift from one t \ p e of copy to another. It is the
ability to recognize these shift points, and to change when YOU
encounter them from—sa\-—promise copy to mechanism copy to
documentation copy to promise copy again, that makes vour ad
stick together, or fall apart.
This is an almost impossible skill to communicate, since it
relies so much on the feel of each individual situation. However.
I can show it to YOU after it's occurred, in a series of four ads
on the same general type of product—books—and how each differs from the others in the way large blocks of copy elements are
blended in and out of the oyer-all sell.
As IYe said before, I use mail order as m\ example because
mail order is the longest general form of copy, because it usually sells the hardest, and because the techniques I'm talking
about are usually outlined most clearly in this type of copy.
Let's look at our four ads, and see how each approaches the
basic task of selling a similar product in a different way and with
a different blend of elements:

Sample Ad #1
This is the friend-winning ad we looked at in our last chapter. IYe indicated each major block of copy, in sequence, by a
letter of the alphabet; and each of the shift points b\- a number.
I am using as examples all direct-promise headlines. The
promise in this headline is almost universal (A): that vou can
make anybody like YOU. (See page 208.)
Instead of intensifying the promise immediately, however, as

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

207

many other ads in this category have done, this copv starts out
by restating the original headline promise (making anybody like
you becomes popularity) and by defining the previously unrecognized fact that this popularity can be taught. (B).
Why was this done? For two reasons: (1) because this novel,
almost paradoxical redefinition iCan popularity be purchased?)
established an immediate point of difference between this book
and the dozens of similar titles that had come before it
always a critical problem. And (2> because this ad's subject was
a teacher, and the ad's whole believabilitv rested upon the fact
that so many large and respected corporations had paid this
man so much money to reach these techniques to their employees.
This is established by the ads first shift point and first transitional sentence (1). This has hern proved by . , . leads directlv
into the first documentation block (.'•. in which the corporations
are named.
Thus we have the developing pattern of the ad as:
Promise
Definition
Documentation . . .
Right up to the next transition sentence (2), which brings in
the first detailed promise block iD). and which then echoes again
the documentation (E) and price comparison.
Now, after a brief transitional promise (F), the ad defines
again the importance of the over-all promise (G), backs it up
with a third restatement of the documentation (H), and then
states directly the price comparison and monev-back guarantee (I).
Then, with the classic transition (3), it goes on to devote the
rest of the ad to a detailed cataloguing of the promise (f). A
recitation of promises that are far stronger now—because of the
preparation of definition and documentation that has been laid
for them, than they would have ever been had thev simply been
put at the beginning of the ad without such preparation.

IO

The B o o k That Took
Forty Y e a r s t o Write
in the entire United States, only one man
teaches these techniques. His name is Paul
P. Parker, L.L.D. He has concentrated his
1
entire lifetime in one fietd—discovering the
best methods of winning people over to your
way of thinking, without anugomring them.
Or. Parker believes that that* methods are

How to Reach People
Who Really Count

1

How to present your ideas to superiors in a
way that automatically wins acceptance.
How to overcome favoritism.
How to handle objections. Stop people from
saying no. Make it eaty for them to say y e s .
How lo make a compliment twice as elfec-

{

It I» estimated that Dr
been paid over a million do
the executives of such out
porations as National Cash
Sears, Roebuck & Co., The
& Pacific Tea Co., North Am
tion, Inc., General Motors C
Kodak Co., Crane Co.. DuPo
tal Bakeries, General Mills
Co., Borden Dairies, CocaCo., StAndnrd Oil fA, Gor

210

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

Incidentalh', notice how the negative promises (K), and the
full list of documentation (L), have been placed out of the main
stream of the ad where they can be read, or not read, by those
that are interested in them.
Sample Ad #2
An ad for a book on improving the power of vour mind.
Again the promise-headline (A), intensified by—this time—an
elaboration of this promise (B). (See page 212.)
Now, using its first transitional sentence (1), the ad moves
into two paragraphs of negative (C) and positive (D) redefinition.
And then, with a single transition-word {Simph/—2), again elaborates the promise, making it stronger and stronger and more
and more detailed, and at the same time giving it the believabilitvtone of definition.
This definition-tone is unchanged throughout (F), where
promise is again interwoven with fact, leading immediately into
a transition (3) in which the tone is that of proof, but the content is straight promise (G).
Then this proof is connected (4) with the entire promise
catalog (H) which fills the rest of the ad.
This ad—enormously successful—is one of the best examples
of interweaving we have. There is so subtle a blending here of
definition, documentation and promise, that everv word of the
copy soon takes on the aura of pure fact.
Sample Ad #3
Now we move on to the straight-promise ad. This is the
rock-em, sock-em type, dominated by promise and mechanismpromise, which gains its power from the sheer momentum and
relentlessness of its claims. (See page 216.)
It again starts with the over-all promise (A), which it immediately follows up with a second, elaborating promise (B).

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

211

Then it moves directly into its fundamental definition (C),
which it equates in a' single phrase (then t/oti could—I) with a
greatly detailed promise (D), and then follows up with a beautifully condensed paragraph which consists of a transition in (2) to
a restatement of its fundamental redefinition (E). and out again
(3) to the remainder of the ad. (F>. which is sheer promise and
promise-mechanism from then on.
Here, documentation is disregarded entirely. The full weight
of the sale depends on the power and momentum of the promisetrain.

Sample Ad #4
And finally, we have a beauty book. Here, the main promiseheadline (B) is preceded by the critical authority-reference (A)
which: first, sets it apart from the other similar products it must
erase from the prospects mind: and second, brings in immediately the key persuader of its author. (See page 220.)
(C) block, while promise copy, also serves the simultaneous
purpose of being a momentum-builder—a technique we will discuss in a moment.
Using the different type faces and sizes as transitional elements, the copy then introduces its crucial concentration copy
(D), in which it redefines what the woman can now expect from
her appearance, and in which it outdates other approaches to giving this fulfillment to her.
After

block.

(1)

Because... comes

the

first

promise-elaboration

But there is no piling up of claim upon claim here. There is
too much ingrained skepticism in this prospect—too much awareness of other, previous claims that have disappointed her in the
past. This skepticism must be anticipated, and answered. This is
done, first (F) by agreeing with it, and then (G) bv shifting the
entire story onto the doctor for twelve paragraphs—bv far the
longest reference to authority of any of our four sample ads.

213

214

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

Then a transition (2) back to promise (H), which fills out
the rest of the ad.

See How the Structure Differs
Let me say this. Although I have not pointed out everv transition, nor everv blending of different tvpes of copv, I have, 1
hope, given you enough material to see clearlv how ads differ in
overall structure, as they differ in content, as the demands of
their material differ.
They range from the simplest promise-elaboration (example
3), to the most subtle blending of all the various elements of desire, image, proof, definition and what have vou (example 2), to
the most complicated promise-and-proof. . . promise-and-proof
reinforcement (example 4).
Each problem demands a different structure. Each signals.
as you write it, that here—at this precise point—your copy has
left your reader. You have gone on straight when lie wants to
turn left. You are piling on promise after promise, when lie no
longer believes you. You are burving him under a sea of statistics, when he is convinced you are telling the truth, and wants
you to make those delicious promises all over again.
This is what you feel when you are writing the ad. Probablv
a kind of irritating confusion. A blockage. A sense that the copv
has suddenly gone dead, and all you are writing now is words.
So you stop, and think, and look for a new direction. I hope.
in this section, that I have given you a faint indication of what
some of these directions might be.
What, on the other hand, can vou learn from analvzing the
structure of your ads (or other writers') after vou have finished
them?
Primarily—what kind of ad you have written. Is it straight
promise? Too much documentation? Too little definition of the
new world of possibilities vour product has created?
Does it still sound too much like evervone else's copv. Or

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

215

product? Could you put another brand-name on it, and not make
any difference?
Have you left anything out? Will this bare promise earrv the
sale? Or could you increase its impact bv paving its wav with
some mechanism or believabilitv copv? How about a proof section? A use photo? A fuller description of the wav it works?
Mind you, this is not content alone that ice are discussing.
If you take the same content, and give it a new structure, you
are going to create a new ad. Trv it. See for yourself. If vou're
stuck sometime, throw awav vour headline, throw awav vour rough
copy flow, and start off again ISO degrees away from where you
started before.
I want to repeat this again: A new structure is a new ad. It
brings out new ideas. Gives vour promises new sharpness, new
flavor, new believabilitv and even begins to create whole new sections that you never dreamed were there in the product before.
So we've come full circle. You start vour ad bv creating your
headline. You develop your copv storv from that headline. But if
the copv story doesn't develop—if vou gradually find that the
headline isn't really that good after all—then perhaps the very
elements that are begging to come out of your 6-point type should
be at the top of your ad.
This is what makes this copv writing so interesting. You're
always being surprised—with ideas from the most ungodly places.
Just make sure you've got vour eves open wide enough to catch
all of them.
Momentum—How to Draw Your Reader Deeper and
Deeper Into Your Copy
There are two other devices we should discuss. Both of them
help tie your ad together, though that's not their primary function.
The first is Momentum. How to draw your reader into vour
copy . . . keep him reading . . . making sure he doesn't quit vou in
the middle.

218
T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

Copy's first job, of course, is to be read. If its not read, it
can't sell. And if you take some time to make your points—to intensify your desire, to build and rebuild vour believability, to reinforce one claim with another—then you'd better make darn
sure that you've put plentv of momentum-builders into vour copv
There are two types:
1. Actual momentum phrases; and
2. Incomplete statements, or teasers, that draw the reader
further into the copy in order to complete them.
The first type, the momentum-phrases, are time-honored.
They are used in almost any sort of persuasive or educational
writing. You insert them in your copy primarily in your transitionsentences, to keep interest from flagging, to indicate to vour
reader the general type of material that's going to follow. They
are "addy," but they work. Here are a few examples, taken from
the four book ads we looked at in the last section:
"They paid up to $22.50 a person to learn priceless
techniques like these:"
"You can learn them all, in your own home next weekend, without risking a penny. Here's how"
"Here is the information you will find in this hook."
"Let me explain."
"All I ask from you is this."
"What you are going to do, in the very first hour that
you receive the book, is this."
"And yet it's only the beginning."
"THEN put this simple trick to work for uou—that
VERY SAME HOUR"
"For example—"
"Read the thrilling answer below."
". • . to start with . . ."
"Just wait till you try this."

THE FINAL TOUCHES

219

And so on. These are actual invitations to read on. H YOU
write long copv, thev should be spotted throughout it.
The second category of momentum-builder is much more
subtle, and giyes YOU thousands of waYs to keep drawing vour
reader along after vour developing thought. It's based on the
simple principle that if YOU make a statement that interests vour
reader, and if vou purposelv and skillinllv do not complete that
statement, so that there is a question of how it can be done, then
he will read on to find out more.
In other words, YOU are continuallv throughout the copv:
1. Creating interest in a specific point;
2. Raising a question in his mind about that point; and
3. Implying an answer to that question later in the copv.
Here are some examples of this technique:
"And YOU will do it often using nothing more than ordinarv tap water, vour own ten fingers, and the contents
of vour garden and vour refrigerator."
"But now. when vou turn on the ignition, a modem
miracle of engineering science comes to life underneath your
hood!"
"Yes! Here at last is the Engineering Miracle vou Ye
been hearing rumors about for months. The fantastic PowerBooster that Continental millionaires use to soup up the
performance of .812,000 cars! The revolutionarv new GasSaver that actuallv gives compact-car economv to Fords.
Chevrolets, Plvmoutbs and dozens of other American cars
now driving in Europe! The sixtv-second attachment that
HAD TO BE BANNED from the great European raceways—because it gave so much added power, so much
added efficiency to any car that used it—that the officials
were forced to rule that it gave these cars an UNFAIR ADVANTAGE over those drivers who couldn't obtain it!"
"How to Grow Thousands of Flowers—Without Dirtying Your Hands."
"Here it is at last. Authoritative medical proof that
men in their forties and fifties and sixties can enjov a sex

220

999

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

life in many ways as satisfying as when thev were in their
twenties—if they are only shown how to combat the hidden forces within their minds and bodies that literally drive
them into impotent!/!"
"Caught! 120 Fish in One Hour!"
"Just picture the scene as these college horticulturists
began this amazing flowering test of roses. For here gathered in a test field were all the highly-prized queens of
rosedom . . . rose blends that today sell for as high as 83.75
for a single plant. Row upon row of roses . . . prize-winners
in international competition . . . the best the world has to
offer . . . AND THEN, NEARLY-WILD STARTED TO
BLOOM!"
And so on. The objective here is to keep lite reader going—
for one more sentence, one more paragraph, one more sequence.
Notice, of course, that every one of these examples not only produces momentum, not only raises questions in the reader's mind
that he virtually must read on to answer—but is also, at exactly
the same time, loaded with sell. Again, interweaving—making
each element in the ad accomplish two objectives. No waste
words.

M o o d — H o w to Pack Your Copy With Drama, Excitement,
Sincerity or Any Other Emotion You Wish
Now we come to the matter of words—and the color which
words create.
I have given you dozens of different examples in this book
of selling copy. All these examples had certain elements in common—they were strong, successful, convincing and so on. But,
at the same time, each of these copy blocks differed from the
others in one immediately apparent way—in the mood that each
set, simply by the rhythm and words that the copy writer used
to express his thoughts.
Words and rhythms. They are to the copy writer what line

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

223

and color are to the painter. They set the mood of your story—
carry the emotion so subtly that vour reader never really realizes
where the excitement or the image or the conviction is actually
coming from.
For example, here are several of the passages we've looked
at before. Now let's italicize the mood-builders within them, that
make each so different from the others:
Objective: to emphasize color, beauty, excitement, visual
image:
And when that third precious ingredient reaches those
buds—then that very morning vou will open the door to
vour house—AND YOU WILL BE BLINDED BY THE
EXPLOSION OF COLOR THAT GREETS YOU IN YOUR
GARDEN! . . . You will see rose bushes weighted down bymasses of blossoms, of a richness and perfume and color
you have never imagined before! You will walk past solid,
blazing rows of chrysanthemums so thick that you can't
even see a leaf in between. . . .
Notice that you don't even distinguish many of the separate
images until they are called to vour attention. Notice also that
some of the words are primarily visual image-sharpeners (weighted
down . . . solid, blazing rows . . . so thick you can't even see a leaf
in between). While others convey, not image, but emotion (precious . . . that very morning . . . blinded . . . greets . . . you never
imagined before).
These words are emotion-definers. They tell the reader what
to feel about the images and ideas you are presenting to him.
Their very essence is that they are so subtle that he does not see
them . . . that thev do not call attention to themselves, but simply
flavor and evaluate the images your copy is forming in his mind.
Certain classes of readers will notice these emotion definers.
When they do, your copy becomes either questionable or corny to
them, and vou have lost them. Therefore, vou have to know always whom you are writing for. What their level of sophistication
is—in tone as well as product-awareness. And vou may have to

^Z4

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

change your tone when you take the same ad from one class of
media to another—down as well as up.
Of course, when everybody sees vour emotion words, then
you've got a bad ad, and you'd better rewrite, fast.
And don't forget the rhythms. Read the ad out loud. See
how you can almost scan it, as though it were close to blankverse. This richness of rhythm parallels the richness of image—
helps build the excitement and sensuousness of the mood.
Now let's look at another piece of pounding copv, and see
how words and rhvthms add to the power and momentum that
are put behind its staccato stream of claims:
"This letter says that if you could onlv liberate the
exact same talent and intelligence and abilitv that vou have
tied up inside you today—then you could:
"read anything you wish, twice as fast as vou can read
it t o d a y . . . "
"absorb facts like a sponge, and repeat them almost
word for word years later . . .
"flash through math, business, financial problems that
have you stopped cold todav. . .
"hold people spellbound with the power of vour speech
and your written word . . .
"out-think others when you have to. tower over them
in judgement, outshine them completely in imagination . . ."
Here again, there are two types of emotion-definers. The
power words (liberate . . . hold spellbound . . . out-think . . . tower
over . . . outshine completely), which build a subconscious current
of potency that permeates each individual claim as it occurs in
the copy. And the frankness, man-to-man, lets-let-our-hair-down
tone-builders (this letter says . . . tied up inside vou . . . like a
sponge . . . stopped cold) that say silently that there's no nonsense
here, no high-faluting phrases—just common-sense which can be
absorbed bv anvone.
And, of course, the machine-gun rhvthm. Short, choppy
sentences. Verb . . . verb . . . verb. Claim . . . claim . . . claim. Pro-

T H E FINAL T O U C H E S

225

pelling the reader through the copy. Piling promise upon promise, image upon image in an attempt to overwhelm him.
Notice especially the vast difference between these two
highly-successful pieces of copy. Their vocabulary, the type of
emotions they strive to arouse, the images they use, the models
of speech they borrow, the length of sentence and paragraph, the
ratio of adjectives to nouns and verbs, etc.
We could go on, of course. Go back to the Volkswagen copy,
and see how the emotional tone of sincerity is conveyed by the
absence of adjectives, in all the places you'd ordinarily expect to
find them. As well as whimsey. a continuous self-kidding, which
builds, first, a sort of corporate affection, and then trust.
Try the fire injector ad again. Notice how the long, rather
clumsv sentences give a feeling of ingenuousness and reason to
the copy Try to read them out loud. You can't. They don't scan;
they have no definable rlrythm: they don't look like a "copy writer"
wrote them at all. And, of course, there is the same straightfrom-the-shoulder phraseology, to reinforce this feeling of honest appraisal.
All this, I repeat, is done unconsciously. You do not see it
unless vou look for it. And sometimes you have to dig very deep
indeed to get every piece of it.
Mood-building is deliberate on the part of the copywriter—
unnoticed on the part of his reader. As with so much of the
rest of the ad, it lies underneath the surface, to do its work
imperceptibly.

EPILOGUE
A COPY WRITER'S
LIBRARY

I have now given you what I've
learned about writing copy. It has taken many years to learn it—
three more to set it down to my own satisfaction. I hope it will
help vou in the onlv way that really counts: to do a better job
and make a little more money.
There are, of course, manv many men in this industry who
know far more about these techniques, and who can produce far
better copy than I. Mv excuse for writing this book is that they
don't seem to have included—at least to my present knowledge—
manv of the specific techniques which I've discussed with you
here.
Some of them' have written books on the subject—great
books—and I'd like to list them here for you. I think you should
buy and read, every one of them, and then thumb through them
again everv year or so, just to catch what you may have forgotten.
Here they are:
Indispensable, of course, is Julian Watkins' great anthology:
The 100 Greatest Advertisements, Moore Publishing, 1949.
227

228

E P I L O G U E —A COPY W R I T E R S LIBRARY

Claude Hopkins wrote a great book, My Life in Advertising,
Harper, 1927. Make them dig it up for you. And see if vou can't
get some of the old Hopkins ads.
John E. Kennedy (not F.) wrote a little pamphlet manv years
ago called Intensive Advertising, which has just been republished
by Printer's Ink. Get it. It'll be the most profitable evening's reading you've ever done.
J. K. Lasker, who worked with both these great writers, never
wrote anything himself. But he did give a series of talks before
his staff one week, and Printers Ink has again captured them.
They're called The Lasker Story.
Robert Collier's Letter Book is published bv Prentice-Hall.
It's a gold mine.
David Ogilw wrote Confessions of an Advertising Man, which
you can buv as a paperback. Charming and wonderfully profitable.
Rosser Reeves' very short book, Reality in Advertising, is
published by Knopf, and must be read several times before vou
get everything out of it vou should.
Milton Biow's book, Butting In, is marvelous in the first half,
repetitive in the second.
And don't forget Campbell's book, Writing Non-Fiction. Or
those by Caples. Young, Glim and Bedell. Or the motivation research books bv Dichter and Martineau. Or the great book on
layout, Visual Persuasion, bv Baker.
Then there are the books on American society' todav—bv
Mills, Riesman, Fromm, Kardiner and all the rest. And the articles on the emerging trends in the media. And the media themselves. And of course—your primarv source—the ads themselves.
Keep reading. Keep analvzing. Keep writing. Keep looking
for the new idea—the million dollars hidden somewhere in that
typewriter of yours. Always shoot for the moon—it's one of the
few real thrills left today!



======================================================================
FILE: Influence - The Psychology of Persuasion.txt
======================================================================

INFLUENCE
The Psychology
of
Persuasion

ROBERT B. CIALDINI PH.D.

This book is dedicated to Chris,
who glows in his father’s eye

Contents
Introduction

v

1
Weapons of Influence

1

2
Reciprocation: The Old Give and Take…and Take

13

3
Commitment and Consistency: Hobgoblins of the Mind

43

4
Social Proof: Truths Are Us

87

5
Liking: The Friendly Thief

126

6
Authority: Directed Deference

157

7
Scarcity: The Rule of the Few

178

Epilogue Instant Influence:
Primitive Consent for an Automatic Age

205

Notes

211

Bibliography

225

Index

241

Acknowledgments
About the Author
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher

INTRODUCTION

I can admit it freely now. All my life I’ve been a patsy. For as long as I
can recall, I’ve been an easy mark for the pitches of peddlers, fundraisers, and operators of one sort or another. True, only some of these
people have had dishonorable motives. The others—representatives of
certain charitable agencies, for instance—have had the best of intentions.
No matter. With personally disquieting frequency, I have always found
myself in possession of unwanted magazine subscriptions or tickets to
the sanitation workers’ ball. Probably this long-standing status as
sucker accounts for my interest in the study of compliance: Just what
are the factors that cause one person to say yes to another person? And
which techniques most effectively use these factors to bring about such
compliance? I wondered why it is that a request stated in a certain way
will be rejected, while a request that asks for the same favor in a slightly
different fashion will be successful.
So in my role as an experimental social psychologist, I began to do
research into the psychology of compliance. At first the research

vi / Influence
took the form of experiments performed, for the most part, in my
laboratory and on college students. I wanted to find out which psychological principles influence the tendency to comply with a request. Right
now, psychologists know quite a bit about these principles—what they
are and how they work. I have characterized such principles as weapons
of influence and will report on some of the most important in the upcoming chapters.
After a time, though, I began to realize that the experimental work,
while necessary, wasn’t enough. It didn’t allow me to judge the importance of the principles in the world beyond the psychology building and
the campus where I was examining them. It became clear that if I was
to understand fully the psycholgy of compliance, I would need to
broaden my scope of investigation. I would need to look to the compliance professionals—the people who had been using the principles on
me all my life. They know what works and what doesn’t; the law of
survival of the fittest assures it. Their business is to make us comply,
and their livelihoods depend on it. Those who don’t know how to get
people to say yes soon fall away; those who do, stay and flourish.
Of course, the compliance professionals aren’t the only ones who
know about and use these principles to help them get their way. We
all employ them and fall victim to them, to some degree, in our daily
interactions with neighbors, friends, lovers, and offspring. But the
compliance practitioners have much more than the vague and amateurish understanding of what works than the rest of us have. As I thought
about it, I knew that they represented the richest vein of information
about compliance available to me. For nearly three years, then, I combined my experimental studies with a decidedly more entertaining
program of systematic immersion into the world of compliance professionals—sales operators, fund-raisers, recruiters, advertisers, and others.
The purpose was to observe, from the inside, the techniques and
strategies most commonly and effectively used by a broad range of
compliance practitioners. That program of observation sometimes took
the form of interviews with the practitioners themselves and sometimes
with the natural enemies (for example, police buncosquad officers,
consumer agencies) of certain of the practitioners. At other times it involved an intensive examination of the written materials by which
compliance techniques are passed down from one generation to another—sales manuals and the like.
Most frequently, though, it has taken the form of participant observation. Participant observation is a research approach in which the researcher becomes a spy of sorts. With disguised identity and intent, the
investigator infiltrates the setting of interest and becomes a full-fledged

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / vii
participant in the group to be studied. So when I wanted to learn about
the compliance tactics of encyclopedia (or vacuum-cleaner, or portraitphotography, or dance-lesson) sales organizations, I would answer a
newspaper ad for sales trainees and have them teach me their methods.
Using similar but not identical approaches, I was able to penetrate advertising, public-relations, and fund-raising agencies to examine their
techniques. Much of the evidence presented in this book, then, comes
from my experience posing as a compliance professional, or aspiring
professional, in a large variety of organizations dedicated to getting us
to say yes.
One aspect of what I learned in this three-year period of participant
observation was most instructive. Although there are thousands of
different tactics that compliance practitioners employ to produce yes,
the majority fall within six basic categories. Each of these categories is
governed by a fundamental psychological principle that directs human
behavior and, in so doing, gives the tactics their power. The book is
organized around these six principles, one to a chapter. The principles—consistency, reciprocation, social proof, authority, liking, and
scarcity—are each discussed in terms of their function in the society
and in terms of how their enormous force can be commissioned by a
compliance professional who deftly incorporates them into requests
for purchases, donations, concessions, votes, assent, etc. It is worthy of
note that I have not included among the six principles the simple rule
of material self-interest—that people want to get the most and pay the
least for their choices. This omission does not stem from any perception
on my part that the desire to maximize benefits and minimize costs is
unimportant in driving our decisions. Nor does it come from any
evidence I have that compliance professionals ignore the power of this
rule. Quite the opposite: In my investigations, I frequently saw practitioners use (sometimes honestly, sometimes not) the compelling “I can
give you a good deal” approach. I choose not to treat the material selfinterest rule separately in this book because I see it as a motivational
given, as a goes-without-saying factor that deserves acknowledgment
but not extensive description.
Finally, each principle is examined as to its ability to produce a distinct
kind of automatic, mindless compliance from people, that is, a willingness to say yes without thinking first. The evidence suggests that the
ever-accelerating pace and informational crush of modern life will make
this particular form of unthinking compliance more and more prevalent
in the future. It will be increasingly important for the society, therefore,
to understand the how and why of automatic influence.
It has been some time since the first edition of Influence was published.

viii / Influence
In the interim, some things have happened that I feel deserve a place
in this new edition. First, we now know more about the influence
process than before. The study of persuasion, compliance, and change
has advanced, and the pages that follow have been adapted to reflect
that progress. In addition to an overall update of the material, I have
included a new feature that was stimulated by the responses of prior
readers.
That new feature highlights the experiences of individuals who have
read Influence, recognized how one of the principles worked on (or for)
them in a particular instance, and wrote to me describing the event.
Their descriptions, which appear in the Reader’s Reports at the end of
each chapter, illustrate how easily and frequently we can fall victim to
the pull of the influence process in our everyday lives.
I wish to thank the following individuals who—either directly or
through their course instructors—contributed the Reader’s Reports
used in this edition: Pat Bobbs, Mark Hastings, James Michaels, Paul
R. Nail, Alan J. Resnik, Daryl Retzlaff, Dan Swift, and Karla Vasks. In
addition, I would like to invite new readers to submit similar reports
for possible publication in a future edition. They may be sent to me at
the Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
85287-1104.
—ROBERT B. CIALDINI

Chapter 1
WEAPONS OF
INFLUENCE
Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN

I opened an Indian jewelry store in Arizona. She was giddy with a
GOT A PHONE CALL ONE DAY FROM A FRIEND WHO HAD RECENTLY

curious piece of news. Something fascinating had just happened, and
she thought that, as a psychologist, I might be able to explain it to her.
The story involved a certain allotment of turquoise jewelry she had
been having trouble selling. It was the peak of the tourist season, the
store was unusually full of customers, the turquoise pieces were of good
quality for the prices she was asking; yet they had not sold. My friend
had attempted a couple of standard sales tricks to get them moving.
She tried calling attention to them by shifting their location to a more
central display area; no luck. She even told her sales staff to “push” the
items hard, again without success.
Finally, the night before leaving on an out-of-town buying trip, she
scribbled an exasperated note to her head saleswoman, “Everything in
this display case, price × ½,” hoping just to be rid of the offending pieces,
even if at a loss. When she returned a few days later, she was not surprised to find that every article had been sold. She was shocked, though,
to discover that, because the employee had read the “½” in her scrawled
message as a “2,” the entire allotment had sold out at twice the original
price!

2 / Influence
That’s when she called me. I thought I knew what had happened but
told her that, if I were to explain things properly, she would have to
listen to a story of mine. Actually, it isn’t my story; it’s about mother
turkeys, and it belongs to the relatively new science of ethology—the
study of animals in their natural settings. Turkey mothers are good
mothers—loving, watchful, and protective. They spend much of their
time tending, warming, cleaning, and huddling the young beneath
them. But there is something odd about their method. Virtually all of
this mothering is triggered by one thing: the “cheep-cheep” sound of
young turkey chicks. Other identifying features of the chicks, such as
their smell, touch, or appearance, seem to play minor roles in the
mothering process. If a chick makes the “cheep-cheep” noise, its
mother will care for it; if not, the mother will ignore or sometimes kill
it.
The extreme reliance of maternal turkeys upon this one sound was
dramatically illustrated by animal behaviorist M. W. Fox in his description of an experiment involving a mother turkey and a stuffed polecat.1
For a mother turkey, a polecat is a natural enemy whose approach is
to be greeted with squawking, pecking, clawing rage. Indeed, the experimenters found that even a stuffed model of a polecat, when drawn by
a string toward a mother turkey, received an immediate and furious
attack. When, however, the same stuffed replica carried inside it a small
recorder that played the “cheep-cheep” sound of baby turkeys, the
mother not only accepted the oncoming polecat but gathered it underneath her. When the machine was turned off, the polecat model again
drew a vicious attack.
How ridiculous a female turkey seems under these circumstances:
She will embrace a natural enemy just because it goes “cheep-cheep,”
and she will mistreat or murder one of her own chicks just because it
does not. She looks like an automaton whose maternal instincts are
under the automatic control of that single sound. The ethologists tell
us that this sort of thing is far from unique to the turkey. They have
begun to identify regular, blindly mechanical patterns of action in a
wide variety of species.
Called fixed-action patterns, they can involve intricate sequences of
behavior, such as entire courtship or mating rituals. A fundamental
characteristic of these patterns is that the behaviors that compose them
occur in virtually the same fashion and in the same order every time.
It is almost as if the patterns were recorded on tapes within the animals.
When the situation calls for courtship, the courtship tape gets played;
when the situation calls for mothering, the maternal-behavior tape gets

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 3
played. Click and the appropriate tape is activated; whirr and out rolls
the standard sequence of behaviors.
The most interesting thing about all this is the way the tapes are activated. When a male animal acts to defend his territory, for instance,
it is the intrusion of another male of the same species that cues the territorial-defense tape of rigid vigilance, threat, and, if need be, combat
behaviors. But there is a quirk in the system. It is not the rival male as
a whole that is the trigger; it is some specific feature of him, the trigger
feature. Often the trigger feature will be just one tiny aspect of the totality
that is the approaching intruder. Sometimes a shade of color is the
trigger feature. The experiments of ethologists have shown, for instance,
that a male robin, acting as if a rival robin had entered its territory, will
vigorously attack nothing more than a clump of robin-redbreast feathers
placed there. At the same time, it will virtually ignore a perfect stuffed
replica of a male robin without red breast feathers; similar results have
been found in another species of bird, the bluethroat, where it appears
that the trigger for territorial defense is a specific shade of blue breast
feathers.2
Before we enjoy too smugly the ease with which lower animals can
be tricked by trigger features into reacting in ways wholly inappropriate
to the situation, we might realize two things. First, the automatic, fixedaction patterns of these animals work very well the great majority of
the time. For example, because only healthy, normal turkey chicks make
the peculiar sound of baby turkeys, it makes sense for mother turkeys
to respond maternally to that single “cheep-cheep” noise. By reacting
to just that one stimulus, the average mother turkey will nearly always
behave correctly. It takes a trickster like a scientist to make her tapelike
response seem silly. The second important thing to understand is that
we, too, have our preprogrammed tapes; and, although they usually
work to our advantage, the trigger features that activate them can be
used to dupe us into playing them at the wrong times.3
This parallel form of human automatic action is aptly demonstrated
in an experiment by Harvard social psychologist Ellen Langer. A wellknown principle of human behavior says that when we ask someone
to do us a favor we will be more successful if we provide a reason.
People simply like to have reasons for what they do. Langer demonstrated this unsurprising fact by asking a small favor of people waiting
in line to use a library copying machine: Excuse me, I have five pages. May
I use the Xerox machine because I’m in a rush? The effectiveness of this
request-plus-reason was nearly total: Ninety-four percent of those asked
let her skip ahead of them in line. Compare this success rate to the results
when she made the request only: Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use

4 / Influence
the Xerox machine? Under those circumstances, only 60 percent of those
asked complied. At first glance, it appears that the crucial difference
between the two requests was the additional information provided by
the words “because I’m in a rush.” But a third type of request tried by
Langer showed that this was not the case. It seems that it was not the
whole series of words, but the first one, “because,” that made the difference. Instead of including a real reason for compliance, Langer’s third
type of request used the word “because” and then, adding nothing new,
merely restated the obvious: Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use the
Xerox machine because I have to make some copies? The result was that once
again nearly all (93 percent) agreed, even though no real reason, no
new information, was added to justify their compliance. Just as the
“cheep-cheep” sound of turkey chicks triggered an automatic mothering
response from maternal turkeys—even when it emanated from a stuffed
polecat—so, too, did the word “because” trigger an automatic compliance response from Langer’s subjects, even when they were given no
subsequent reason to comply. Click, whirr!4
Although some of Langer’s additional findings show that there are
many situations in which human behavior does not work in a mechanical, tape-activated way, what is astonishing is how often it does. For
instance, consider the strange behavior of those jewelry-store customers
who swooped down on an allotment of turquoise pieces only after the
items had been mistakenly offered at double their original price. I can
make no sense of their behavior, unless it is viewed in click, whirr terms.
The customers, mostly well-to-do vacationers with little knowledge
of turquoise, were using a standard principle—a stereotype—to guide
their buying: “expensive = good.” Thus the vacationers, who wanted
“good” jewelry, saw the turquoise pieces as decidedly more valuable
and desirable when nothing about them was enhanced but the price.
Price alone had become a trigger feature for quality; and a dramatic
increase in price alone had led to a dramatic increase in sales among
the quality-hungry buyers. Click, whirr!
It is easy to fault the tourists for their foolish purchase decisions. But
a close look offers a kinder view. These were people who had been
brought up on the rule “You get what you pay for” and who had seen
that rule borne out over and over in their lives. Before long, they had
translated the rule to mean “expensive = good.” The “expensive = good”
stereotype had worked quite well for them in the past, since normally
the price of an item increases along with its worth; a higher price typically reflects higher quality. So when they found themselves in the position of wanting good turquoise jewelry without much knowledge of

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 5
turquoise, they understandably relied on the old standby feature of
cost to determine the jewelry’s merits.
Although they probably did not realize it, by reacting solely to the
price feature of the turquoise, they were playing a shortcut version of
betting the odds. Instead of stacking all the odds in their favor by trying
painstakingly to master each of the things that indicate the worth of
turquoise jewelry, they were counting on just one—the one they knew
to be usually associated with the quality of any item. They were betting
that price alone would tell them all they needed to know. This time,
because someone mistook a “½” for a “2,” they bet wrong. But in the
long run, over all the past and future situations of their lives, betting
those shortcut odds may represent the most rational approach possible.
In fact, automatic, stereotyped behavior is prevalent in much of human action, because in many cases it is the most efficient form of behaving, and in other cases it is simply necessary. You and I exist in an extraordinarily complicated stimulus environment, easily the most rapidly
moving and complex that has ever existed on this planet. To deal with
it, we need shortcuts. We can’t be expected to recognize and analyze all
the aspects in each person, event, and situation we encounter in even
one day. We haven’t the time, energy, or capacity for it. Instead, we
must very often use our stereotypes, our rules of thumb to classify
things according to a few key features and then to respond mindlessly
when one or another of these trigger features is present.
Sometimes the behavior that unrolls will not be appropriate for the
situation, because not even the best stereotypes and trigger features
work every time. But we accept their imperfection, since there is really
no other choice. Without them we would stand frozen—cataloging,
appraising, and calibrating—as the time for action sped by and away.
And from all indications, we will be relying on them to an even greater
extent in the future. As the stimuli saturating our lives continue to grow
more intricate and variable, we will have to depend increasingly on
our shortcuts to handle them all.
The renowned British philosopher Alfred North Whitehead recognized this inescapable quality of modern life when he asserted that
“civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can
perform without thinking about them.” Take, for example, the “advance” offered to civilization by the discount coupon, which allows
consumers to assume that they will receive a reduced purchase price
by presenting the coupon. The extent to which we have learned to operate mechanically on that assumption is illustrated in the experience
of one automobile-tire company. Mailed-out coupons that—because of
a printing error—offered no savings to recipients produced just as much
customer response as did error-free coupons that offered substantial

6 / Influence
savings. The obvious but instructive point here is that we expect discount coupons to do double duty. Not only do we expect them to save
us money, we also expect them to save us the time and mental energy
required to think about how to do it. In today’s world, we need the first
advantage to handle pocketbook strain; but we need the second advantage to handle something potentially more important—brain strain.
It is odd that despite their current widespread use and looming future
importance, most of us know very little about our automatic behavior
patterns. Perhaps that is so precisely because of the mechanistic, unthinking manner in which they occur. Whatever the reason, it is vital
that we clearly recognize one of their properties: They make us terribly
vulnerable to anyone who does know how they work.
To understand fully the nature of our vulnerability, another glance
at the work of the ethologists is in order. It turns out that these animal
behaviorists with their recorded “cheep-cheeps” and their clumps of
colored breast feathers are not the only ones who have discovered how
to activate the behavior tapes of various species. There is a group of
organisms, often termed mimics, that copy the trigger features of other
animals in an attempt to trick these animals into mistakenly playing
the right behavior tapes at the wrong times. The mimic will then exploit
this altogether inappropriate action for its own benefit.
Take, for example, the deadly trick played by the killer females of
one genus of firefly (Photuris) on the males of another firefly genus
(Photinus). Understandably, the Photinus males scrupulously avoid
contact with the bloodthirsty Photuris females. But through centuries
of experience, the female hunters have located a weakness in their
prey—a special blinking courtship code by which members of the victims’ species tell one another they are ready to mate. Somehow, the
Photuris female has cracked the Photinus courtship code. By mimicking
the flashing mating signals of her prey, the murderess is able to feast
on the bodies of males whose triggered courtship tapes cause them to
fly mechanically into death’s, not love’s, embrace.
Insects seem to be the most severe exploiters of the automaticity of
their prey; it is not uncommon to find their victims duped to death. But
less uncompromising forms of exploitation occur as well. There is, for
instance, a little fish, the saber-toothed blenny, that takes advantage of
an unusual program of cooperation worked out by members of two
other species of fish. The cooperating fish form a Mutt and Jeff team
consisting of a large grouper fish on the one hand and a much smaller
type of fish on the other. The smaller fish serves as a cleaner to the larger
one, which allows the cleaner to approach it and even enter its mouth
to pick off fungus and other parasites that have attached themselves to

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 7
the big fish’s teeth or gills. It is a beautiful arrangement: The big grouper
gets cleaned of harmful pests, and the cleaner fish gets an easy dinner.
The larger fish normally devours any other small fish foolish enough
to come close to it. But when the cleaner approaches, the big fish suddenly stops all movement and floats open-mouthed and nearly immobile
in response to an undulating dance that the cleaner performs. This
dance appears to be the trigger feature of the cleaner that activates the
dramatic passivity of the big fish. It also provides the saber-toothed
blenny with an angle—a chance to take advantage of the cleaning ritual
of the cooperators. The blenny will approach the large predator, copying
the undulations of the cleaner’s dance and automatically producing the
tranquil, unmoving posture of the big fish. Then, true to its name, it
will quickly rip a mouthful from the larger fish’s flesh and dart away
before its startled victim can recover.5
There is a strong but sad parallel in the human jungle. We too have
exploiters who mimic trigger features for our own brand of automatic
responding. Unlike the mostly instinctive response sequences of nonhumans, our automatic tapes usually develop from psychological
principles or stereotypes we have learned to accept. Although they vary
in their force, some of these principles possess a tremendous ability to
direct human action. We have been subjected to them from such an
early point in our lives, and they have moved us about so pervasively
since then, that you and I rarely perceive their power. In the eyes of
others, though, each such principle is a detectable and ready weapon—a
weapon of automatic influence.
There is a group of people who know very well where the weapons
of automatic influence lie and who employ them regularly and expertly
to get what they want. They go from social encounter to social encounter
requesting others to comply with their wishes; their frequency of success
is dazzling. The secret of their effectiveness lies in the way they structure
their requests, the way they arm themselves with one or another of the
weapons of influence that exist within the social environment. To do
this may take no more than one correctly chosen word that engages a
strong psychological principle and sets an automatic behavior tape
rolling within us. And trust the human exploiters to learn quickly exactly
how to profit from our tendency to respond mechanically according to
these principles.
Remember my friend the jewelry-store owner? Although she benefited
by accident the first time, it did not take her long to begin exploiting
the “expensive = good” stereotype regularly and intentionally. Now,
during the tourist season, she first tries to speed the sale of an item that
has been difficult to move by increasing its price substantially. She
claims that this is marvelously cost-effective. When it works on the

8 / Influence
unsuspecting vacationers—as it frequently does—it results in an
enormous profit margin. And even when it is not initially successful,
she can mark the article “Reduced from _____” and sell it at its original
price while still taking advantage of the “expensive = good” reaction
to the inflated figure.
By no means is my friend original in this last use of the “expensive
= good” rule to snare those seeking a bargain. Culturist and author Leo
Rosten gives the example of the Drubeck brothers, Sid and Harry, who
owned a men’s tailor shop in Rosten’s neighborhood while he was
growing up in the 1930s. Whenever the salesman, Sid, had a new customer trying on suits in front of the shop’s three-sided mirror, he would
admit to a hearing problem, and, as they talked, he would repeatedly
request that the man speak more loudly to him. Once the customer had
found a suit he liked and had asked for the price, Sid would call to his
brother, the head tailor, at the back of the room, “Harry, how much for
this suit?” Looking up from his work—and greatly exaggerating the
suit’s true price—Harry would call back, “For that beautiful all-wool
suit, forty-two dollars.” Pretending not to have heard and cupping his
hand to his ear, Sid would ask again. Once more Harry would reply,
“Forty-two dollars.” At this point, Sid would turn to the customer and
report, “He says twenty-two dollars.” Many a man would hurry to buy
the suit and scramble out of the shop with his “expensive = good”
bargain before Poor Sid discovered the “mistake.”
There are several components shared by most of the weapons of
automatic influence to be described in this book. We have already discussed two of them—the nearly mechanical process by which the power
within these weapons can be activated, and the consequent exploitability
of this power by anyone who knows how to trigger them. A third
component involves the way that the weapons of automatic influence
lend their force to those who use them. It’s not that the weapons, like
a set of heavy clubs, provide a conspicuous arsenal to be used by one
person to bludgeon another into submission.
The process is much more sophisticated and subtle. With proper execution, the exploiters need hardly strain a muscle to get their way. All
that is required is to trigger the great stores of influence that already
exist in the situation and direct them toward the intended target. In this
sense, the approach is not unlike that of the Japanese martial-art form
called jujitsu. A woman employing jujitsu would utilize her own
strength only minimally against an opponent. Instead, she would exploit
the power inherent in such naturally present principles as gravity,
leverage, momentum, and inertia. If she knows how and where to engage the action of these principles, she can easily defeat a physically

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 9
stronger rival. And so it is for the exploiters of the weapons of automatic
influence that exist naturally around us. The exploiters can commission
the power of these weapons for use against their targets while exerting
little personal force. This last feature of the process allows the exploiters
an enormous additional benefit—the ability to manipulate without the
appearance of manipulation. Even the victims themselves tend to see
their compliance as determined by the action of natural forces rather
than by the designs of the person who profits from that compliance.
An example is in order. There is a principle in human perception, the
contrast principle, that affects the way we see the difference between
two things that are presented one after another. Simply put, if the second
item is fairly different from the first, we will tend to see it as more different than it actually is. So if we lift a light object first and then lift a
heavy object, we will estimate the second object to be heavier than if
we had lifted it without first trying the light one. The contrast principle
is well established in the field of psychophysics and applies to all sorts
of perceptions besides weight. If we are talking to a beautiful woman
at a cocktail party and are then joined by an unattractive one, the second
woman will strike us as less attractive than she actually is.
In fact, studies done on the contrast principle at Arizona State and
Montana State universities suggest that we may be less satisfied with
the physical attractiveness of our own lovers because of the way the
popular media bombard us with examples of unrealistically attractive
models. In one study college students rated a picture of an averagelooking member of the opposite sex as less attractive if they had first
looked through the ads in some popular magazines. In another study,
male college-dormitory residents rated the photo of a potential blind
date. Those who did so while watching an episode of the Charlie’s Angels
TV series viewed the blind date as a less attractive woman than those
who rated her while watching a different show. Apparently it was the
uncommon beauty of the Angels female stars that made the blind date
seem less attractive.6
A nice demonstration of perceptual contrast is sometimes employed
in psychophysics laboratories to introduce students to the principle
firsthand. Each student takes a turn sitting in front of three pails of
water—one cold, one at room temperature, and one hot. After placing
one hand in the cold water and one in the hot water, the student is told
to place both in the lukewarm water simultaneously. The look of amused
bewilderment that immediately registers tells the story: Even though
both hands are in the same bucket, the hand that has been in the cold
water feels as if it is now in hot water, while the one that was in the hot
water feels as if it is now in cold water. The point is that the same

10 / Influence
thing—in this instance, room-temperature water—can be made to seem
very different, depending on the nature of the event that precedes it.
Be assured that the nice little weapon of influence provided by the
contrast principle does not go unexploited. The great advantage of this
principle is not only that it works but also that it is virtually undetectable. Those who employ it can cash in on its influence without any appearance of having structured the situation in their favor. Retail clothiers
are a good example. Suppose a man enters a fashionable men’s store
and says that he wants to buy a three-piece suit and a sweater. If you
were the salesperson, which would you show him first to make him
likely to spend the most money? Clothing stores instruct their sales
personnel to sell the costly item first. Common sense might suggest the
reverse: If a man has just spent a lot of money to purchase a suit, he
may be reluctant to spend very much more on the purchase of a
sweater. But the clothiers know better. They behave in accordance with
what the contrast principle would suggest: Sell the suit first, because
when it comes time to look at sweaters, even expensive ones, their prices
will not seem as high in comparison. A man might balk at the idea of
spending $95 for a sweater, but if he has just bought a $495 suit, a $95
sweater does not seem excessive. The same principle applies to a man
who wishes to buy the accessories (shirt, shoes, belt) to go along with
his new suit. Contrary to the commonsense view, the evidence supports
the contrast-principle prediction. As sales motivation analysts Whitney,
Hubin, and Murphy state, “The interesting thing is that even when a
man enters a clothing store with the express purpose of purchasing a
suit, he will almost always pay more for whatever accessories he buys
if he buys them after the suit purchase than before.”
It is much more profitable for salespeople to present the expensive
item first, not only because to fail to do so will lose the influence of the
contrast principle; to fail to do so will also cause the principle to work
actively against them. Presenting an inexpensive product first and following it with an expensive one will cause the expensive item to seem
even more costly as a result—hardly a desirable consequence for most
sales organizations. So, just as it is possible to make the same bucket of
water appear to be hotter or colder, depending on the temperature of
previously presented water, it is possible to make the price of the same
item seem higher or lower, depending on the price of a previously
presented item.
Clever use of perceptual contrast is by no means confined to clothiers.
I came across a technique that engaged the contrast principle while I
was investigating, undercover, the compliance tactics of real-estate
companies. To “learn the ropes,” I was accompanying a company realty
salesman on a weekend of showing houses to prospective home buyers.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 11
The salesman—we can call him Phil—was to give me tips to help me
through my break-in period. One thing I quickly noticed was that
whenever Phil began showing a new set of customers potential buys,
he would start with a couple of undesirable houses. I asked him about
it, and he laughed. They were what he called “setup” properties. The
company maintained a run-down house or two on its lists at inflated
prices. These houses were not intended to be sold to customers but to
be shown to them, so that the genuine properties in the company’s inventory would benefit from the comparison. Not all the sales staff made
use of the setup houses, but Phil did. He said he liked to watch his
prospects’ “eyes light up” when he showed the place he really wanted
to sell them after they had seen the run-down houses. “The house I got
them spotted for looks really great after they’ve first looked at a couple
of dumps.”
Automobile dealers use the contrast principle by waiting until the
price for a new car has been negotiated before suggesting one option
after another that might be added. In the wake of a fifteen-thousanddollar deal, the hundred or so dollars required for a nicety like an FM
radio seems almost trivial in comparison. The same will be true of the
added expense of accessories like tinted windows, dual side-view mirrors, whitewall tires, or special trim that the salesman might suggest
in sequence. The trick is to bring up the extras independently of one
another, so that each small price will seem petty when compared to the
already-determined much larger one. As the veteran car buyer can attest,
many a budget-sized final price figure has ballooned from the addition
of all those seemingly little options. While the customer stands, signed
contract in hand, wondering what happened and finding no one to
blame but himself, the car dealer stands smiling the knowing smile of
the jujitsu master.
READER’S REPORT

From the Parent of a College Coed
Dear Mother and Dad:
Since I left for college I have been remiss in writing and
I am sorry for my thoughtlessness in not having written before. I will bring you up to date now, but before you read on,
please sit down. You are not to read any further unless you
are sitting down, okay?
Well, then, I am getting along pretty well now. The skull
fracture and the concussion I got when I jumped out the
window of my dormitory when it caught on fire shortly after
my arrival here is pretty well healed now. I only spent two

12 / Influence
weeks in the hospital and now I can see almost normally and
only get those sick headaches once a day. Fortunately, the
fire in the dormitory, and my jump, was witnessed by an attendant at the gas station near the dorm, and he was the one
who called the Fire Department and the ambulance. He also
visited me in the hospital and since I had nowhere to live
because of the burntout dormitory, he was kind enough to
invite me to share his apartment with him. It’s really a basement room, but it’s kind of cute. He is a very fine boy and
we have fallen deeply in love and are planning to get married.
We haven’t got the exact date yet, but it will be before my
pregnancy begins to show.
Yes, Mother and Dad, I am pregnant. I know how much
you are looking forward to being grandparents and I know
you will welcome the baby and give it the same love and
devotion and tender care you gave me when I was a child.
The reason for the delay in our marriage is that my boyfriend
has a minor infection which prevents us from passing our
pre-marital blood tests and I carelessly caught it from him.
Now that I have brought you up to date, I want to tell you
that there was no dormitory fire, I did not have a concussion
or skull fracture, I was not in the hospital, I am not pregnant,
I am not engaged, I am not infected, and there is no boyfriend.
However, I am getting a “D” in American History, and an
“F” in Chemistry and I want you to see those marks in their
proper perspective.
Your loving daughter,
Sharon
Sharon may be failing chemistry, but she gets an “A” in psychology.

Chapter 2
RECIPROCATION
The Old Give and Take…and Take
Pay every debt, as if God wrote the bill.
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON

experiA ment. He sent Christmas cards to a sample of perfect strangers.
FEW YEARS AGO, A UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR TRIED A LITTLE

Although he expected some reaction, the response he received was
amazing—holiday cards addressed to him came pouring back from the
people who had never met nor heard of him. The great majority of those
who returned a card never inquired into the identity of the unknown
professor. They received his holiday greeting card, click, and, whirr,
they automatically sent one in return. While small in scope, this study
nicely shows the action of one of the most potent of the weapons of influence around us—the rule for reciprocation.1 The rule says that we
should try to repay, in kind, what another person has provided us. If
a woman does us a favor, we should do her one in return; if a man
sends us a birthday present, we should remember his birthday with a
gift of our own; if a couple invites us to a party, we should be sure to
invite them to one of ours. By virtue of the reciprocity rule, then, we
are obligated to the future repayment of favors, gifts, invitations, and
the like. So typical is it for indebtedness to accompany the receipt of
such things that a term like “much obliged” has become a synonym for
“thank you,” not only in the English language but in others as well.
The impressive aspect of the rule for reciprocation and the sense of
obligation that goes with it is its pervasiveness in human culture. It is
so widespread that after intensive study, sociologists such as Alvin

14 / Influence
Gouldner can report that there is no human society that does not subscribe to the rule.2 And within each society it seems pervasive also; it
permeates exchanges of every kind. Indeed, it may well be that a developed system of indebtedness flowing from the rule for reciprocation
is a unique property of human culture. The noted archaeologist Richard
Leakey ascribes the essence of what makes us human to the reciprocity
system: “We are human because our ancestors learned to share their
food and their skills in an honored network of obligation,”3 he says.
Cultural anthropologists Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox view this “web of
indebtedness” as a unique adaptive mechanism of human beings, allowing for the division of labor, the exchange of diverse forms of goods,
the exchange of different services (making it possible for experts to
develop), and the creation of a cluster of interdependencies that bind
individuals together into highly efficient units.4
It is the future orientation inherent in a sense of obligation that is
critical to its ability to produce social advances of the sort described by
Tiger and Fox. A widely shared and strongly held feeling of future obligation made an enormous difference in human social evolution, because it meant that one person could give something (for example, food,
energy, care) to another with confidence that it was not being lost. For
the first time in evolutionary history, one individual could give away
any of a variety of resources without actually giving them away. The
result was the lowering of the natural inhibitions against transactions
that must be begun by one person’s providing personal resources to
another. Sophisticated and coordinated systems of aid, gift giving, defense, and trade became possible, bringing immense benefit to the societies that possessed them. With such clearly adaptive consequences for
the culture, it is not surprising that the rule for reciprocation is so deeply
implanted in us by the process of socialization we all undergo.
I know of no better illustration of how reciprocal obligations can
reach long and powerfully into the future than the perplexing story of
five thousand dollars of relief aid that was sent in 1985 between Mexico
and the impoverished people of Ethiopia. In 1985 Ethiopia could justly
lay claim to the greatest suffering and privation in the world. Its economy was in ruin. Its food supply had been ravaged by years of drought
and internal war. Its inhabitants were dying by the thousands from
disease and starvation. Under these circumstances, I would not have
been surprised to learn of a five-thousand-dollar relief donation from
Mexico to that wrenchingly needy country. I remember my chin hitting
my chest, though, when a brief newspaper item I was reading insisted
that the aid had gone in the opposite direction. Native officials of the
Ethiopian Red Cross had decided to send the money to help the victims
of that year’s earthquakes in Mexico City.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 15
It is both a personal bane and a professional blessing that whenever
I am confused by some aspect of human behavior, I feel driven to investigate further. In this instance, I was able to track down a fuller account of the story. Fortunately a journalist who had been as bewildered
as I was by the Ethiopians’ action had asked for an explanation. The
answer he received offers eloquent validation of the reciprocity rule:
Despite the enormous needs prevailing in Ethiopia, the money was
being sent because Mexico had sent aid to Ethiopia in 1935, when it was
invaded by Italy. So informed, I remained awed, but I was no longer
puzzled. The need to reciprocate had transcended great cultural differences, long distances, acute famine, and immediate self-interest. Quite
simply, a half century later, against all countervailing forces, obligation
triumphed.
Make no mistake, human societies derive a truly significant competitive advantage from the reciprocity rule, and consequently they make
sure their members are trained to comply with and believe in it. Each
of us has been taught to live up to the rule, and each of us knows about
the social sanctions and derision applied to anyone who violates it. The
labels we assign to such a person are loaded with negativity—moocher,
ingrate, welsher. Because there is general distaste for those who take
and make no effort to give in return, we will often go to great lengths
to avoid being considered one of their number. It is to those lengths
that we will often be taken and, in the process, be “taken” by individuals
who stand to gain from our indebtedness.
To understand how the rule for reciprocation can be exploited by
one who recognizes it as the source of influence it certainly is, we might
closely examine an experiment performed by Professor Dennis Regan
of Cornell University.5 A subject who participated in the study found
himself rating, along with another subject, the quality of some paintings
as part of an experiment on “art appreciation.” The other rater—we can
call him Joe—was only posing as a fellow subject and was actually Dr.
Regan’s assistant. For our purposes, the experiment took place under
two different conditions. In some cases, Joe did a small, unsolicited favor
for the true subject. During a short rest period, he left the room for a
couple of minutes and returned with two bottles of Coca-Cola, one for
the subject and one for himself, saying, “I asked him [the experimenter]
if I could get myself a Coke, and he said it was okay, so I bought one
for you, too.” In other cases, Joe did not provide the subject with a favor;
he simply returned from the two-minute break empty-handed. In all
other respects, however, Joe behaved identically.
Later on, after the paintings had all been rated and the experimenter
had momentarily left the room, Joe asked the subject to do him a favor.
He indicated that he was selling raffle tickets for a new car and that if

16 / Influence
he sold the most tickets, he would win a fifty-dollar prize. Joe’s request
was for the subject to buy some raffle tickets at twenty-five cents apiece:
“Any would help, the more the better.” The major finding of the study
concerns the number of tickets subjects purchased from Joe under the
two conditions. Without question, Joe was more successful in selling
his raffle tickets to the subjects who had received his earlier favor. Apparently feeling that they owed him something, these subjects bought
twice as many tickets as the subjects who had not been given the prior
favor. Although the Regan study represents a fairly simple demonstration of the workings of the rule for reciprocation, it illustrates several
important characteristics of the rule that, upon further consideration,
help us to understand how it may be profitably used.

The Rule Is Overpowering
One of the reasons reciprocation can be used so effectively as a device
for gaining another’s compliance is its power. The rule possesses awesome strength, often producing a “yes” response to a request that, except
for an existing feeling of indebtedness, would have surely been refused.
Some evidence of how the rule’s force can overpower the influence of
other factors that normally determine whether a request will be complied with can be seen in a second result of the Regan study. Besides
his interest in the impact of the reciprocity rule on compliance, Regan
was also interested in how liking for a person affects the tendency to
comply with that person’s request. To measure how liking toward Joe
affected the subjects’ decisions to buy his raffle tickets, Regan had them
fill out several rating scales indicating how much they liked Joe. He
then compared their liking responses with the number of tickets they
had purchased from Joe. There was a significant tendency for subjects
to buy more raffle tickets from Joe the more they liked him. But this
alone is hardly a startling finding. Most of us would have guessed that
people are more willing to do a favor for someone they like.
The interesting thing about the Regan experiment, however, is that
the relationship between liking and compliance was completely wiped
out in the condition under which subjects had been given a Coke by
Joe. For those who owed him a favor, it made no difference whether
they liked him or not; they felt a sense of obligation to repay him, and
they did. The subjects in that condition who indicated that they disliked
Joe bought just as many of his tickets as did those who indicated that
they liked him. The rule for reciprocity was so strong that it simply
overwhelmed the influence of a factor—liking for the requester—that
normally affects the decision to comply.
Think of the implications. People we might ordinarily dislike—unsa-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 17
vory or unwelcome sales operators, disagreeable acquaintances, representatives of strange or unpopular organizations—can greatly increase
the chance that we will do what they wish merely by providing us with
a small favor prior to their requests. Let’s take an example that by now
many of us have encountered. The Hare Krishna Society is an Eastern
religious sect with centuries-old roots traceable to the Indian city of
Calcutta. But its spectacular modern-day story occurred in the 1970s,
when it experienced a remarkable growth not only in followers but also
in wealth and property. The economic growth was funded through a
variety of activities, the principal and still most visible of which is the
request for donations by Society members from passersby in public
places. During the early history of the group in this country, the solicitation for contributions was attempted in a fashion memorable for anyone
who saw it. Groups of Krishna devotees—often with shaved heads,
and wearing ill-fitting robes, leg wrappings, beads, and bells—would
canvass a city street, chanting and bobbing in unison while begging for
funds.
Although highly effective as a technique for gaining attention, this
form of fund-raising did not work especially well. The average American considered the Krishnas weird, to say the least, and was reluctant
to provide money to support them. It quickly became clear to the Society
that it had a considerable public-relations problem. The people being
asked for contributions did not like the way the members looked,
dressed, or acted. Had the Society been an ordinary commercial organization, the solution would have been simple—change the things the
public does not like. But the Krishnas are a religious organization; and
the way members look, dress, and act is partially tied to religious factors.
Because, in any denomination, religious factors are typically resistant
to change because of worldly considerations, the Krishna leadership
was faced with a real dilemma. On the one hand were beliefs, modes
of dress, and hairstyles that had religious significance. On the other
hand, threatening the organization’s financial welfare, were the lessthan-positive feelings of the American public toward these things.
What’s a sect to do?
The Krishnas’ resolution was brilliant. They switched to a fund-raising
tactic that made it unnecessary for target persons to have positive feelings toward the fund-raisers. They began to employ a donation-request
procedure that engaged the rule for reciprocation, which, as demonstrated by the Regan study, is strong enough to overcome the factor of
dislike for the requester. The new strategy still involves the solicitation
of contributions in public places with much pedestrian traffic (airports
are a favorite), but now, before a donation is requested, the target person
is given a “gift”—a book (usually the Bhagavad Gita), the Back to Godhead

18 / Influence
magazine of the Society, or, in the most cost-effective version, a flower.
The unsuspecting passerby who suddenly finds a flower pressed into
his hands or pinned to his jacket is under no circumstances allowed to
give it back, even if he asserts that he does not want it. “No, it is our
gift to you,” says the solicitor, refusing to accept it. Only after the
Krishna member has thus brought the force of the reciprocation rule to
bear on the situation is the target asked to provide a contribution to the
Society. This benefactor-before-beggar strategy has been wildly successful for the Hare Krishna Society, producing large-scale economic gains
and funding the ownership of temples, businesses, houses, and property
in 321 centers in the United States and overseas.
As an aside, it is instructive that the reciprocation rule has begun to
outlive its usefulness for the Krishnas, not because the rule itself is any
less potent societally, but because we have found ways to prevent the
Krishnas from using it on us. After once falling victim to their tactic,
many travelers are now alert to the presence of robed Krishna Society
solicitors in airports and train stations, adjusting their paths to avoid
an encounter and preparing beforehand to ward off a solicitor’s “gift.”
Although the Society has tried to counter this increased vigilance by
instructing members to be dressed and groomed in modern styles to
avoid immediate recognition when soliciting (some actually carry flight
bags or suitcases), even disguise has not worked especially well for
the Krishnas. Too many individuals now know better than to accept
unrequested offerings in public places like airports. Furthermore,
airport administrators have initiated a number of procedures designed
to forewarn us of the Krishnas’ true identity and intent. Thus, it is now
common airport practice to restrict the Krishnas’ soliciting activity to
certain areas of the airport and to announce through signs and the
public address system that the Krishnas are soliciting there. It is a testament to the societal value of reciprocation that we have chosen to fight
the Krishnas mostly by seeking to avoid rather than to withstand the
force of their gift giving. The reciprocity rule that empowers their tactic
is too strong—and socially beneficial—for us to want to violate it.
Politics is another arena in which the power of the reciprocity rule
shows itself. Reciprocation tactics appear at every level:
• At the top, elected officials engage in “logrolling” and the exchange
of favors that makes politics the place of strange bedfellows, indeed.
The out-of-character vote of one of our elected representatives on a
bill or measure can often be understood as a favor returned to the
bill’s sponsor. Political analysts were amazed at Lyndon Johnson’s
ability to get so many of his programs through Congress during his
early administration. Even members of congress who were thought

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 19
to be strongly opposed to the proposals were voting for them. Close
examination by political scientists has found the cause to be not so
much Johnson’s political savvy as the large score of favors he had
been able to provide to other legislators during his many years of
power in the House and Senate. As President, he was able to produce
a truly remarkable amount of legislation in a short time by calling in
those favors. It is interesting that this same process may account for
the problems Jimmy Carter had in getting his programs through
Congress during his early administration, despite heavy Democratic
majorities in both House and Senate. Carter came to the presidency
from outside the Capitol Hill establishment. He campaigned on his
outside-Washington identity, saying that he was indebted to no one
there. Much of his legislative difficulty upon arriving may be traced
to the fact that no one there was indebted to him.
• At another level, we can see the recognized strength of the reciprocity
rule in the desire of corporations and individuals to provide judicial
and legislative officials with gifts and favors, and in the series of
legal restrictions against such gifts and favors. Even with legitimate
political contributions, the stockpiling of obligations often underlies
the stated purpose of supporting a favorite candidate. One look at
the lists of companies and organizations that contribute to the campaigns of both major candidates in important elections gives evidence
of such motives. A skeptic, requiring direct evidence of the quid pro
quo expected by political contributors, might look to the remarkably
bald-faced admission by Charles H. Keating, Jr., who was later convicted on multiple counts of fraud in this country’s savings and loan
disaster. Addressing the question of whether a connection existed
between the $1.3 million he had contributed to the campaigns of five
U.S. senators and their subsequent actions in his behalf against federal
regulators, he asserted, “I want to say in the most forceful way I can:
I certainly hope so.”
• At the grass-roots level, local political organizations have learned
that the principal way to keep their candidates in office is to make
sure they provide a wide range of little favors to the voters. The “ward
heelers” of many cities still operate effectively in this fashion. But
ordinary citizens are not alone in trading political support for small
personal favors. During the 1992 presidential primary campaign,
actress Sally Kellerman was asked why she was lending her name
and efforts to the candidacy of Democratic hopeful Jerry Brown. Her
reply: “Twenty years ago, I asked ten friends to help me move. He
was the only one who showed up.”
Of course, the power of reciprocity can be found in the merchandising

20 / Influence
field as well. Although the number of possible examples is large, let’s
examine a pair of familiar ones deriving from the “free sample.” As a
marketing technique, the free sample has a long and effective history.
In most instances, a small amount of the relevant product is provided
to potential customers for the stated purpose of allowing them to try it
to see if they like it. And certainly this is a legitimate desire of the
manufacturer—to expose the public to the qualities of the product. The
beauty of the free sample, however, is that it is also a gift and, as such,
can engage the reciprocity rule. In true jujitsu fashion, the promoter
who gives free samples can release the natural indebting force inherent
in a gift while innocently appearing to have only the intention to inform.
A favorite place for free samples is the supermarket, where customers
are frequently provided with small cubes of a certain variety of cheese
or meat to try. Many people find it difficult to accept a sample from the
always-smiling attendant, return only the toothpick, and walk away.
Instead, they buy some of the product, even if they might not have liked
it especially well. A highly effective variation on this marketing procedure is illustrated in the case, cited by Vance Packard in The Hidden Persuaders, of the Indiana supermarket operator who sold an astounding
one thousand pounds of cheese in a few hours one day by putting out
the cheese and inviting customers to cut off slivers for themselves as
free samples.
A different version of the free-sample tactic is used by the Amway
Corporation, a rapid-growth company that manufactures and distributes
household and personal-care products in a vast national network of
door-to-door neighborhood sales. The company, which has grown from
a basement-run operation a few years ago to a one-and-a-half-billiondollar-yearly-sales business, makes use of the free sample in a device
called the BUG. The BUG consists of a collection of Amway
products—bottles of furniture polish, detergent, or shampoo, spray
containers of deodorizers, insect killers, or window cleaners—carried
to the customer’s home in a specially designed tray or just a polyethylene bag. The confidential Amway Career Manual then instructs the
salesperson to leave the BUG with the customer “for 24, 48, or 72 hours,
at no cost or obligation to her. Just tell her you would like her to try the
products…. That’s an offer no one can refuse.” At the end of the trial
period, the Amway representative returns and picks up orders for those
of the products the customer wishes to purchase. Since few customers
use up the entire contents of even one of the product containers in such
a short time, the salesperson may then take the remaining product
portions in the BUG to the next potential customer down the line or
across the street and start the process again. Many Amway representatives have several BUGs circulating in their districts at one time.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 21
Of course, by now you and I know that the customer who has accepted and used the BUG products has been trapped into facing the influence of the reciprocity rule. Many such customers yield to a sense of
obligation to order those of the salesperson’s products that they have
tried and thereby partially consumed. And, of course, by now the Amway Corporation knows that to be the case. Even in a company with
as excellent a growth record as Amway, the BUG device has created a
big stir. Reports by state distributors to the parent company record a
remarkable effect:
Unbelievable! We’ve never seen such excitement. Product is
moving at an unbelievable rate, and we’ve only just begun….
[Local] distributors took the BUGS, and we’ve had an unbelievable
increase in sales [from Illinois distributor]. The most fantastic retail
idea we’ve ever had!…On the average, customers purchased about
half the total amount of the BUG when it is picked up…. In one
word, tremendous! We’ve never seen a response within our entire
organization like this [from Massachusetts distributor].
The Amway distributors appear to be bewildered—happily so, but
nonetheless bewildered—by the startling power of the BUG. Of course,
by now you and I should not be.
The reciprocity rule governs many situations of a purely interpersonal
nature where neither money nor commercial exchange is at issue. Perhaps my favorite illustration of the enormous force available from the
reciprocation weapon of influence comes from such a situation. The
European scientist, Eibl-Eibesfeldt, provides the account of a German
soldier during World War I whose job was to capture enemy soldiers
for interrogation. Because of the nature of the trench warfare at that
time, it was extremely difficult for armies to cross the no-man’s-land
between opposing front lines; but it was not so difficult for a single
soldier to crawl across and slip into an enemy trench position. The
armies of the Great War had experts who regularly did so to capture
an enemy soldier, who would then be brought back for questioning.
The German expert of our account had often successfully completed
such missions in the past and was sent on another. Once again, he
skillfully negotiated the area between fronts and surprised a lone enemy
soldier in his trench. The unsuspecting soldier, who had been eating at
the time, was easily disarmed. The frightened captive with only a piece
of bread in his hand then performed what may have been the most
important act of his life. He gave his enemy some of the bread. So affected was the German by this gift that he could not complete his mission. He turned from his benefactor and recrossed the no-man’s-land
empty-handed to face the wrath of his superiors.

22 / Influence
An equally compelling point regarding the power of reciprocity comes
from an account of a woman who saved her life not by giving a gift as
did the captured soldier, but by refusing a gift and the powerful obligations that went with it. The woman, Diane Louie, was an inhabitant of
Jonestown, Guyana, in November of 1978 when its leader, Jim Jones,
called for the mass suicide of all residents, most of whom compliantly
drank and died from a vat of poison-laced Kool-Aid. Diane Louie,
however, rejected Jones’s command and made her way out of Jonestown
and into the jungle. She attributes her willingness to do so to her earlier
refusal to accept special favors from him when she was in need. She
turned down his offer of special food while she was ill because “I knew
once he gave me those privileges, he’d have me. I didn’t want to owe
him nothin’.”

The Rule Enforces Uninvited Debts
Earlier we suggested that the power of the reciprocity rule is such that
by first doing us a favor, strange, disliked, or unwelcome others can
enhance the chance that we will comply with one of their requests.
However, there is another aspect of the rule, besides its power, that allows this phenomenon to occur. Another person can trigger a feeling
of indebtedness by doing us an uninvited favor. Recall that the rule
only states that we should provide to others the kind of actions they
have provided us; it does not require us to have asked for what we have
received in order to feel obligated to repay. For instance, the Disabled
American Veterans organization reports that its simple mail appeal for
donations produces a response rate of about 18 percent. But when the
mailing also includes an unsolicited gift (gummed, individualized address labels), the success rate nearly doubles to 35 percent. This is not
to say that we might not feel a stronger sense of obligation to return a
favor we have requested, only that such a request is not necessary to
produce our indebtedness.
If we reflect for a moment about the social purpose of the reciprocity
rule, we can see why this should be so. The rule was established to
promote the development of reciprocal relationships between individuals so that one person could initiate such a relationship without the fear
of loss. If the rule is to serve that purpose, then, an uninvited first favor
must have the ability to create an obligation. Recall, also, that reciprocal
relationships confer an extraordinary advantage upon cultures that
foster them and that, consequently, there will be strong pressures to
ensure that the rule does serve its purpose. Little wonder, then, that
the influential French anthropologist Marcel Mauss, in describing the
social pressures surrounding the gift-giving process in human culture,

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 23
can state, “There is an obligation to give, an obligation to receive, and
an obligation to repay.”6
Although the obligation to repay constitutes the essence of the reciprocity rule, it is the obligation to receive that makes the rule so easy
to exploit. The obligation to receive reduces our ability to choose whom
we wish to be indebted to and puts that power in the hands of others.
Let’s reexamine a pair of earlier examples to get a sense of how the
process works. First, let’s return to the Regan study, where we find that
the favor causing subjects to double the number of raffle tickets purchased from Joe was not one they had requested. Joe had voluntarily
left the room and returned with one Coke for himself and one for the
subject. There was not a single subject who refused the Coke. It is easy
to see why it would have been awkward to turn down Joe’s favor: Joe
had already spent his money; a soft drink was an appropriate favor in
the situation, especially since Joe had one himself; it would have been
considered impolite to reject Joe’s thoughtful action. Nevertheless, receipt of that Coke produced an indebtedness that manifested itself
clearly when Joe announced his desire to sell some raffle tickets. Notice
the important asymmetry here—all the genuinely free choices were
Joe’s. He chose the form of the initial favor, and he chose the form of
the return favor. Of course, one could say that the subject had the choice
of saying no to both of Joe’s offers. But those would have been tough
choices. To have said no at either point would have required the subject
to go against the natural cultural forces favoring reciprocation arrangements that Jujitsu Joe had aligned himself with.
The extent to which even an unwanted favor, once received, can
produce indebtedness is aptly illustrated in the soliciting technique of
the Hare Krishna Society. During systematic observation of the airport
soliciting strategy of the Krishnas, I have recorded a variety of responses
from target persons. One of the most regular occurs as follows. An airport visitor—a businessman, let’s say—is hurriedly walking along
through a densely peopled area. The Krishna solicitor steps in front of
him and hands him a flower. The man, reacting with surprise, takes it.7
Almost immediately, he tries to give it back, saying that he does not
want the flower. The Krishna member responds that it is a gift from the
Krishna Society and that it is the man’s to keep…however, a donation
to further the Society’s good works would be appreciated. Again the
target protests, “I don’t want this flower. Here, take it.” And again the
solicitor refuses, “It’s our gift to you, sir.” There is visible conflict on
the businessman’s face. Should he keep the flower and walk away
without giving anything in return, or should he yield to the pressure
of the deeply ingrained reciprocity rule and provide a contribution? By
now, the conflict has spread from his face to his posture. He leans away

24 / Influence
from his benefactor, seemingly about to break free, only to be drawn
back again by the pull of the rule. Once more his body tilts away, but
it’s no use; he cannot disengage. With a nod of resignation, he fishes in
his pocket and comes up with a dollar or two that is graciously accepted.
Now he can walk away freely, and he does, “gift” in hand, until he encounters a waste container—where he throws the flower.
Purely by accident, I happened to witness a scene that demonstrates
that the Krishnas know very well how frequently their gifts are unwanted by the people who receive them. While spending a day observing a soliciting Krishna group at Chicago’s O’Hare International
Airport a few years ago, I noticed that one of the group members would
frequently leave the central area and return with more flowers to resupply her companions. As it happened, I had decided to take a break just
as she was leaving on one of her supply missions. Having nowhere to
go, I followed. Her journey turned out to be a garbage route. She went
from trash can to trash can beyond the immediate area to retrieve all
the flowers that had been discarded by Krishna targets. She then returned with the cache of recovered flowers (some that had been recycled
who knows how many times) and distributed them to be profitably
cycled through the reciprocation process once more. The thing that
really impressed me about all this was that most of the discarded flowers
had brought donations from the people who had cast them away. The
nature of the reciprocity rule is such that a gift so unwanted that it was
jettisoned at the first opportunity had nonetheless been effective and
exploitable.
The ability of uninvited gifts to produce feelings of obligation is recognized by a variety of organizations besides the Krishnas. How many
times have each of us received small gifts through the mail—personalized address labels, greeting cards, key rings—from charity agencies
that ask for funds in an accompanying note? I have received five in just
the past year, two from disabled veterans’ groups and the others from
missionary schools or hospitals. In each case, there was a common
thread in the accompanying message. The goods that were enclosed
were to be considered a gift from the organization; and any money I
wished to send should not be regarded as payment but rather as a return
offering. As the letter from one of the missionary programs stated, the
packet of greeting cards I had been sent was not to be directly paid for,
but was designed “to encourage your kindness.” If we look past the
obvious tax advantage, we can see a reason why it would be beneficial
for the organization to have the cards viewed as a gift instead of merchandise: There is a strong cultural pressure to reciprocate a gift, even
an unwanted one; but there is no such pressure to purchase an unwanted
commercial product.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 25

The Rule Can Trigger Unfair Exchanges
There is yet one other feature of the reciprocity rule that allows it to be
exploited for profit. Paradoxically, the rule developed to promote equal
exchanges between partners, yet it can be used to bring about decidedly
unequal results. The rule demands that one sort of action be reciprocated
with a similar sort of action. A favor is to be met with another favor; it
is not to be met with neglect, and certainly not with attack. But within
the similar-action boundaries, considerable flexibility is allowed. A
small initial favor can produce a sense of obligation to agree to a substantially larger return favor. Since, as we have already seen, the rule
allows one person to choose the nature of the indebting first favor and
the nature of the debt-canceling return favor, we could easily be manipulated into an unfair exchange by those who might wish to exploit the
rule.
Once again, we can turn to the Regan experiment for evidence. Remember in that study that Joe gave one group of subjects a bottle of
Coca-Cola as an initiating gift and later asked all subjects to buy some
of his raffle tickets at twenty-five cents apiece. What I have so far neglected to mention is that the study was done in the late 1960s, when the
price of a Coke was a dime. The average subject who had been given a
ten-cent drink bought two of Joe’s raffle tickets, although some bought
as many as seven. Even if we look just at the average subject, though,
we can tell that Joe made quite a deal. A 500 percent return on investment is respectable indeed!
But in Joe’s case, even a 500 percent return amounted to only fifty
cents. Can the reciprocity rule produce meaningfully large differences
in the sizes of the exchanged favors? Under the right circumstances, it
certainly can. Take, for instance, the account of a student of mine concerning a day she remembers ruefully:
About one year ago, I couldn’t start my car. As I was sitting there,
a guy in the parking lot came over and eventually jump-started
the car. I said thanks, and he said you’re welcome; as he was
leaving, I said that if he ever needed a favor to stop by. About a
month later, the guy knocked on my door and asked to borrow
my car for two hours as his was in the shop. I felt somewhat obligated but uncertain, since the car was pretty new and he looked
very young. Later, I found out that he was underage and had no
insurance. Anyway, I lent him the car. He totaled it.
How could it happen that an intelligent young woman would agree
to turn over her new car to a virtual stranger (and a youngster at that)

26 / Influence
because he had done her a small favor a month earlier? Or, more generally, why should it be that small first favors often stimulate larger
return favors? One important reason concerns the clearly unpleasant
character of the feeling of indebtedness. Most of us find it highly disagreeable to be in a state of obligation. It weighs heavily on us and demands to be removed. It is not difficult to trace the source of this feeling.
Because reciprocal arrangements are so vital in human social systems,
we have been conditioned to be uncomfortable when beholden. If we
were to ignore breezily the need to return another’s initial favor, we
would stop one reciprocal sequence dead and would make it less likely
that our benefactor would do such favors in the future. Neither event
is in the best interests of society. Consequently, we are trained from
childhood to chafe, emotionally, under the saddle of obligation. For
this reason alone, then, we may be willing to agree to perform a larger
favor than we received, merely to relieve ourselves of the psychological
burden of debt.
But there is another reason as well. A person who violates the reciprocity rule by accepting without attempting to return the good acts of
others is actively disliked by the social group. The exception, of course,
is when the person is prevented from repayment by reasons of circumstance or ability. For the most part, however, there is a genuine distaste
for individuals who fail to conform to the dictates of the reciprocity
rule.8 Moocher and welsher are unsavory labels to be scrupulously
shunned. So undesirable are they that we will sometimes agree to an
unequal exchange in order to dodge them.
In combination, the reality of internal discomfort and the possibility
of external shame can produce a heavy psychological cost. When seen
in the light of this cost, it is not so puzzling that we will often give back
more than we have received in the name of reciprocity. Neither is it so
odd that, as was shown in an experiment conducted at the University
of Pittsburgh, people will often avoid asking for a needed favor if they
will not be in a position to repay it. The psychological cost may simply
outweigh the material loss.
The risk of still other kinds of losses may also persuade people to
decline certain gifts and benefits. Women frequently comment on the
uncomfortable sense of obligation they can feel to return the favors of
a man who has given them an expensive present or paid for a costly
evening out. Even something as small as the price of a drink can produce
a feeling of debt. A student in one of my classes expressed it quite
plainly in a paper she wrote: “After learning the hard way, I no longer
let a guy I meet in a club buy my drinks because I don’t want either of
us to feel that I am obligated sexually.” Research suggests that there is
a basis for her concern. If, instead of paying for them herself, a woman

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 27
allows a man to buy her drinks, she is immediately judged (by both
men and women) as more sexually available to him.9

RECIPROCAL CONCESSIONS
There is a second way to employ the reciprocity rule to get someone to
comply with a request. It is more subtle than the direct route of
providing that person with a favor and then asking for one in return;
yet in some ways it is more devastatingly effective than the straightforward approach. A personal experience I had a few years ago gave me
firsthand evidence of just how well this compliance technique works.
I was walking down the street when I was approached by an elevenor twelve-year-old boy. He introduced himself and said that he was
selling tickets to the annual Boy Scouts circus to be held on the upcoming
Saturday night. He asked if I wished to buy any at five dollars apiece.
Since one of the last places I wanted to spend Saturday evening was
with the Boy Scouts, I declined. “Well,” he said, “if you don’t want to
buy any tickets, how about buying some of our big chocolate bars?
They’re only a dollar each.” I bought a couple and, right away, realized
that something noteworthy had happened. I knew that to be the case
because: (a) I do not like chocolate bars; (b) I do like dollars; (c) I was
standing there with two of his chocolate bars; and (d) he was walking
away with two of my dollars.
To try to understand precisely what had happened, I went to my office
and called a meeting of my research assistants. In discussing the situation, we began to see how the reciprocity rule was implicated in my
compliance with the request to buy the candy bars. The general rule
says that a person who acts in a certain way toward us is entitled to a
similar return action. We have already seen that one consequence of
the rule is an obligation to repay favors we have received. Another
consequence of the rule, however, is an obligation to make a concession
to someone who has made a concession to us. As my research group
thought about it, we realized that was exactly the position the Boy Scout
had put me in. His request that I purchase some one-dollar chocolate
bars had been put in the form of a concession on his part; it was
presented as a retreat from his request that I buy some five-dollar tickets.
If I were to live up to the dictates of the reciprocation rule, there had to
be a concession on my part. As we have seen, there was such a concession: I changed from noncompliant to compliant when he changed from
a larger to a smaller request, even though I was not really interested in
either of the things he offered.
It was a classic example of how a weapon of automatic influence can
infuse a compliance request with its power. I had been moved to buy

28 / Influence
something not because of any favorable feelings toward the item, but
because the purchase request had been presented in a way that drew
force from the reciprocity rule. It had not mattered that I do not like
chocolate bars; the Boy Scout had made a concession to me, click, and,
whirr, I responded with a concession of my own. Of course, the tendency
to reciprocate a concession is not so strong that it will invariably work
in all instances on all people; none of the weapons of influence considered in this book is that strong. However, in my exchange with the
Boy Scout, the tendency had been sufficiently potent to leave me in
mystified possession of a pair of unwanted and overpriced candy bars.
Why should I feel a strain to reciprocate a concession? The answer
rests once again in the benefit of such a tendency to the society. It is in
the interests of any human group to have its members working together
toward the achievement of common goals. However, in many social
interactions the participants begin with requirements and demands
that are unacceptable to one another. Thus the society must arrange to
have these initial, incompatible desires set aside for the sake of socially
beneficial cooperation. This is accomplished through procedures that
promote compromise. Mutual concession is one important such procedure.
The reciprocation rule brings about mutual concession in two ways.
The first is obvious. It pressures the recipient of an already-made concession to respond in kind. The second, while not so obvious, is pivotally
important. Just as in the case of favors, gifts, or aid, the obligation to
reciprocate a concession encourages the creation of socially desirable
arrangements by ensuring that anyone seeking to start such an arrangement will not be exploited. After all, if there were no social obligation
to reciprocate a concession, who would want to make the first sacrifice?
To do so would be to risk giving up something and getting nothing
back. However, with the rule in effect, we can feel safe making the first
sacrifice to our partner, who is obligated to offer a return sacrifice.
Because the rule for reciprocation governs the compromise process,
it is possible to use an initial concession as part of a highly effective
compliance technique. The technique is a simple one that we can call
the rejection-then-retreat technique. Suppose you want me to agree to
a certain request. One way to increase your chances would be first to
make a larger request of me, one that I will most likely turn down. Then,
after I have refused, you would make the smaller request that you were
really interested in all along. Provided that you have structured your
requests skillfully, I should view your second request as a concession
to me and should feel inclined to respond with a concession of my own,

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 29
the only one I would have immediately open to me—compliance with
your second request.
Was that how the Boy Scout got me to buy his candy bars? Was his
retreat from the five-dollar request to the one-dollar request an artificial
one that was intentionally designed to sell candy bars? As one who has
still refused to discard even his first Scout merit badge, I genuinely
hope not. But whether or not the large-request-then-smaller-request
sequence was planned, its effect was the same, It worked. And because
it works, the rejection-then-retreat technique can and will be used purposely by certain people to get their way. First let’s examine how this
tactic can be used as a reliable compliance device. Later we will see how
it is already being used. Finally we can turn to a pair of little-known
features of the technique that make it one of the most pervasively influential compliance tactics available.
Remember that after my encounter with the Boy Scout, I called my
research assistants together to try to understand what had happened
to me and, as it turned out, to eat the evidence. Actually, we did more
than that. We designed an experiment to test the effectiveness of the
procedure of moving to a desired request after a larger preliminary request had been refused. We had two primary purposes in conducting
the experiment. First, we wanted to see whether this procedure worked
on people besides myself. That is, it certainly seemed that the tactic had
been effective when tried on me earlier in the day; but then, I have a
history of falling for compliance tricks of all sorts. So the question remained, Does the rejection-then-retreat technique work on enough
people to make it a useful procedure for gaining compliance? If so, it
would definitely be something to be aware of in the future.
Our second reason for doing the study was to determine how
powerful a compliance device the technique was. Could it bring about
compliance with a genuinely sizable request? In other words, did the
smaller request to which the requester retreated have to be a small request? If our thinking about what caused the technique to be effective
was correct, the second request did not actually have to be small; it only
had to be smaller than the initial one. It was our suspicion that the
critical thing about a requester’s retreat from a larger to a smaller favor
was its appearance as a concession. So the second request could be an
objectively large one—as long as it was smaller than the first request—and the technique would still work.
After a bit of thought, we decided to try the technique on a request
that we felt few people would agree to perform. Posing as representatives of the “County Youth Counseling Program,” we approached college
students walking on campus and asked if they would be willing to
chaperon a group of juvenile delinquents on a day trip to the zoo. The

30 / Influence
idea of being responsible for a group of juvenile delinquents of unspecified age for hours in a public place without pay was hardly an inviting
one for these students. As we expected, the great majority (83 percent)
refused. Yet we obtained very different results from a similar sample
of college students who were asked the very same question with one
difference. Before we invited them to serve as unpaid chaperons on the
zoo trip, we asked them for an even larger favor—to spend two hours
per week as a counselor to a juvenile delinquent for a minimum of two
years. It was only after they refused this extreme request, as all did,
that we made the smaller, zoo-trip request. By presenting the zoo trip
as a retreat from our initial request, our success rate increased dramatically. Three times as many of the students approached in this manner
volunteered to serve as zoo chaperons.10
Be assured that any strategy able to triple the percentage of compliance with a substantial request (from 17 percent to 50 percent in our
experiment) will be frequently employed in a variety of natural settings.
Labor negotiators, for instance, often use the tactic of beginning with
extreme demands that they do not actually expect to win but from
which they can retreat in a series of seeming concessions designed to
draw real concessions from the opposing side. It would appear, then,
that the larger the initial request, the more effective the procedure, since
there would be more room available for illusory concessions. This is
true only up to a point, however. Research conducted at Bar-Ilan University in Israel on the rejection-then-retreat technique shows that if
the first set of demands is so extreme as to be seen as unreasonable, the
tactic backfires.11 In such cases, the party who has made the extreme
first request is not seen to be bargaining in good faith. Any subsequent
retreat from that wholly unrealistic initial position is not viewed as a
genuine concession and thus is not reciprocated. The truly gifted negotiator, then, is one whose initial position is exaggerated enough to allow
for a series of reciprocal concessions that will yield a desirable final offer
from the opponent, yet is not so outlandish as to be seen as illegitimate
from the start.
It seems that certain of the most successful television producers, such
as Grant Tinker and Gary Marshall, are masters of this art in their negotiations with network censors. In a candid interview with TV Guide
writer Dick Russell, both admitted to “deliberately inserting lines into
scripts that a censor’s sure to ax” so that they could then retreat to the
lines they really wanted included. Marshall appears especially active
in this regard. Consider, for example, the following quotes from Russell’s
article:

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 31
But Marshall…not only admits his tricks…he seems to revel in
them. On one episode of his [then] top-rated Laverne and Shirley
series, for example, he says, “We had a situation where Squiggy’s
in a rush to get out of his apartment and meet some girls upstairs.
He says: ‘Will you hurry up before I lose my lust?’ But in the script
we put something even stronger, knowing the censors would cut
it. They did; so we asked innocently, well, how about ‘lose my
lust’? ‘That’s good,’ they said. Sometimes you gotta go at ’em
backward.”
On the Happy Days series, the biggest censorship fight was over
the word “virgin.” That time, says Marshall, “I knew we’d have
trouble, so we put the word in seven times, hoping they’d cut six
and keep one. It worked. We used the same pattern again with
the word ‘pregnant.’”12
I witnessed another form of the rejection-then-retreat technique in
my investigations of door-to-door sales operations. These organizations
used a less engineered, more opportunistic version of the tactic. Of
course, the most important goal for a door-to-door salesperson is to
make the sale. However, the training programs of each of the companies
I investigated emphasized that a second important goal was to obtain
from prospects the names of referrals—friends, relatives, or neighbors
on whom we could call. For a variety of reasons we will discuss in
Chapter 5, the percentage of successful door-to-door sales increases
impressively when the sales operator is able to mention the name of a
familiar person who “recommended” the sales visit.
Never as a sales trainee was I taught to get the sales pitch refused so
that I could then retreat to a request for referrals. In several such programs, though, I was trained to take advantage of the opportunity to
secure referrals offered by a customer’s purchase refusal: “Well, if it is
your feeling that a fine set of encyclopedias is not right for you at this
time, perhaps you could help me by giving me the names of some others
who might wish to take advantage of our company’s great offer. What
would be the names of some of these people you know?” Many individuals who would not otherwise subject their friends to a high-pressure
sales presentation do agree to supply referrals when the request is
presented as a concession from a purchase request they have just refused.
We have already discussed one reason for the success of the rejectionthen-retreat technique—its incorporation of the reciprocity rule. This
larger-then-smaller-request strategy is effective for a pair of other
reasons as well. The first concerns the perceptual contrast principle we

32 / Influence
encountered in Chapter 1. That principle accounted for, among other
things, the tendency of a man to spend more money on a sweater following his purchase of a suit than before: After being exposed to the
price of the large item, the price of the less expensive one appears smaller
by comparison. In the same way, the larger-then-smaller-request procedure makes use of the contrast principle by making the smaller request
look even smaller by comparison with the larger one. If I want you to
lend me five dollars, I can make it seem like a smaller request by first
asking you to lend me ten dollars. One of the beauties of this tactic is
that by first requesting ten dollars and then retreating to five dollars, I
will have simultaneously engaged the force of the reciprocity rule and
the contrast principle. Not only will my five-dollar request be viewed
as a concession to be reciprocated, it will also look to you like a smaller
request than if I had just asked for it straightaway.
In combination, the influences of reciprocity and perceptual contrast
can present a fearsomely powerful force. Embodied in the rejectionthen-retreat sequence, their conjoined energies are capable of genuinely
astonishing effects. It is my feeling that they provide the only really
plausible explanation of one of the most baffling political actions of our
time: the decision to break into the Watergate offices of the Democratic
National Committee that led to the ruin of Richard Nixon’s presidency.
One of the participants in that decision, Jeb Stuart Magruder, upon first
hearing that the Watergate burglars had been caught, responded with
appropriate bewilderment, “How could we have been so stupid?” Indeed, how?
To understand how enormously ill conceived an idea it was for the
Nixon administration to undertake the break-in, it is necessary to review
a few facts:
• The idea was that of G. Gordon Liddy, who was in charge of intelligence-gathering operations for the Committee to Re-elect the President (CRP). Liddy had gained a reputation among administration
higher-ups as something of a flake, and there were questions about
his stability and judgment.
• Liddy’s proposal was extremely costly, requiring a budget of $250,000
in untraceable cash.
• In late March, when the proposal was approved in a meeting of the
CRP director, John Mitchell, and his assistants Magruder and Frederick LaRue, the outlook for a Nixon victory in the November election
could not have been brighter. Edmund Muskie, the only announced
candidate the early polls had given a chance of unseating the President, had done poorly in the primaries. It looked very much as though

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 33
the most defeatable candidate, George McGovern, would win his
party’s nomination. A Republican victory seemed assured.
• The break-in plan itself was a highly risky operation requiring the
participation and discretion of ten men.
• The Democratic National Committee and its chairman, Lawrence
O’Brien, whose Watergate office was to be burglarized and bugged,
had no information damaging enough to defeat the incumbent President. Nor were they likely to get any, unless the administration did
something very, very foolish.
Despite the obvious counsel of the above reasons, the expensive,
chancy, pointless, and potentially calamitous proposal of a man whose
judgment was known to be questionable was approved. How could it
be that intelligent men of the attainment of Mitchell and Magruder
would do something so very, very foolish? Perhaps the answer lies in a
little-discussed fact: The $250,000 plan they approved was not Liddy’s
first proposal. In fact, it represented a significant concession on his part
from two earlier proposals, of immense proportions. The first of these
plans, made two months earlier in a meeting with Mitchell, Magruder,
and John Dean, described a $I million program that included (in addition
to the bugging of the Watergate) a specially equipped communications
“chase plane,” break-ins, kidnapping and mugging squads, and a yacht
featuring “high-class call girls” to blackmail Democratic politicians. A
second Liddy plan, presented a week later to the same group of Mitchell,
Magruder, and Dean, eliminated some of the program and reduced the
cost to $500,000. It was only after these initial proposals had been rejected by Mitchell that Liddy submitted his “bare-bones” $250,000 plan,
in this instance to Mitchell, Magruder, and Frederick LaRue. This time
the plan, still stupid but less so than the previous ones, was approved.
Could it be that I, a longtime patsy, and John Mitchell, a hardened
and canny politician, might both have been so easily maneuvered into
bad deals by the same compliance tactic—I by a Boy Scout selling candy,
and he by a man selling political disaster?
If we examine the testimony of Jeb Magruder, considered by most
Watergate investigators to provide the most faithful account of the
crucial meeting at which Liddy’s plan was finally accepted, there are
some instructive clues. First, Magruder reports that “no one was particularly overwhelmed with the project”; but “after starting at the grandiose sum of $1 million, we thought that probably $250,000 would be an
acceptable figure…. We were reluctant to send him away with nothing.”
Mitchell, caught up in the “feeling that we should leave Liddy a little
something…signed off on it in the sense of saying, ‘Okay, let’s give him
a quarter of a million dollars and let’s see what he can come up with.’”

34 / Influence
In the context of Liddy’s initial extreme requests, it seems that “a
quarter of a million dollars” had come to be “a little something” to be
left as a return concession. With the clarity afforded by hindsight, Magruder has recalled Liddy’s approach in as succinct an illustration of
the rejection-then-retreat technique as I have ever heard. “If he had
come to us at the outset and said, ‘I have a plan to burglarize and
wiretap Larry O’Brien’s office,’ we might have rejected the idea out of
hand. Instead he came to us with his elaborate call-girl/kidnapping/mugging/sabotage/wiretapping scheme…. He had asked for the
whole loaf when he was quite content to settle for half or even a
quarter.”13
It is also instructive that, although he finally deferred to his boss’s
decision, only one member of the group, Frederick LaRue, expressed
any direct opposition to the proposal. Saying with obvious common
sense, “I don’t think it’s worth the risk,” he must have wondered why
his colleagues Mitchell and Magruder did not share his perspective. Of
course, there could be many differences between LaRue and the other
two men that may have accounted for their differing opinions regarding
the advisability of Liddy’s plan. But one stands out: Of the three, only
LaRue had not been present at the prior two meetings, where Liddy
had outlined his much more ambitious programs. Perhaps, then, only
LaRue was able to see the third proposal for the clunker that it was and
to react to it objectively, uninfluenced by the reciprocity and perceptual
contrast forces acting upon the others.
A bit earlier we said that the rejection-then-retreat technique had, in
addition to the reciprocity rule, a pair of other factors working in its
favor. We have already discussed the first of those factors, the perceptual contrast principle. The additional advantage of the technique is
not really a psychological principle, as in the case of the other two
factors; it is more of a purely structural feature of the request sequence.
Let’s once again say that I wish to borrow five dollars from you. By
beginning with a ten-dollar request, I really can’t lose. If you agree to
it, I will have gotten twice the amount from you I would have settled
for. If, on the other hand, you turn down my initial request, I can retreat
to the five-dollar favor that I desired from the outset and, through the
action of the reciprocity and contrast principles, greatly enhance my
likelihood of success. Either way, I benefit; it’s a case of heads I win,
tails you lose.
The clearest utilization of this aspect of the larger-then-smaller-request
sequence occurs in the retail-store sales practice of “talking the top of
the line.” Here the prospect is invariably shown the deluxe model first.
If the customer buys, there is frosting on the store’s cake. However, if
the customer declines, the salesperson effectively counteroffers with a

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 35
more reasonably priced model. Some proof of the effectiveness of this
procedure comes from a report in Sales Management magazine, reprinted
without comment in Consumer Reports:
If you were a billiard-table dealer, which would you advertise—the
$329 model or the $3,000 model? The chances are you would promote the low-priced item and hope to trade the customer up when
he comes to buy. But G. Warren Kelley, new business promotion
manager at Brunswick, says you could be wrong…. To prove his
point, Kelley has actual sales figures from a representative store….
During the first week, customers…were shown the low end of the
line…and then encouraged to consider more expensive models—the traditional trading-up approach…. The average table sale
that week was $550…. However, during the second week, customers…were led instantly to a $3,000 table, regardless of what they
wanted to see…and then allowed to shop the rest of the line, in
declining order of price and quality. The result of selling down
was an average sale of over $1,000.14
Given the remarkable effectiveness of the rejection-then-retreat
technique, one might think that there could be a substantial disadvantage as well. The victims of the strategy might resent having been
cornered into compliance. The resentment could show itself in a couple
of ways. First, the victim might decide not to live up to the verbal
agreement made with the requester. Second, the victim might come to
distrust the manipulative requester, deciding never to deal with him
again. If either or both of these events occurred with any frequency, a
requester would want to give serious second thought to the use of the
rejection-then-retreat procedure. Research indicates, however, that these
victim reactions do not occur with increased frequency when the rejection-then-retreat technique is used. Somewhat astonishingly, it appears
that they actually occur less frequently! Before trying to understand
why this is the case, let’s first look at the evidence.
A study published in Canada throws light on the question of
whether a victim of the rejection-then-retreat tactic will follow through
with the agreement to perform the requester’s second favor. In addition
to recording whether target persons said yes or no to the desired request
(to work for two unpaid hours one day in a community mental-health
agency), this experiment also recorded whether they showed up to
perform their duties as promised. As usual, the procedure of starting
with a larger request (to volunteer for two hours of work per week in
the agency for at least two years) produced more verbal agreement to
the smaller retreat request (76 percent) than did the procedure of asking
for the smaller request alone (29 percent). The important result, though,

36 / Influence
concerned the show-up rate of those who volunteered; and, again, the rejection-then-retreat procedure was the more effective one (85 percent
vs. 50 percent).15
A different experiment examined whether the rejection-then-retreat
sequence caused victims to feel so manipulated that they would refuse
any further requests. In this study, the targets were college students
who were each asked to give a pint of blood as part of the annual campus blood drive. One group of targets was first asked to give a pint of
blood every six weeks for a minimum of three years. The other targets
were asked only to give the single pint of blood. Those of both groups
who agreed to give a pint of blood and who later appeared at the blood
center were then asked if they would be willing to give their phone
numbers so they could be called upon to donate again in the future.
Nearly all the students who were about to give a pint of blood as a
result of the rejection-then-retreat technique agreed to donate again
later (84 percent), while less than half of the other students who appeared at the blood center did so (43 percent). Even for future favors,
the rejection-then-retreat strategy proved superior.16
Strangely enough, then, it seems that the rejection-then-retreat tactic
spurs people not only to agree to a desired request but actually to carry
out the request and, finally, to volunteer to perform further requests.
What could there be about the technique that makes people who have
been duped into compliance so bewilderingly likely to continue to
comply? For an answer, we might look at the requester’s act of concession, which is the heart of the procedure. We have already seen that as
long as it is not viewed to be a transparent trick, the concession will
likely stimulate a return concession. But what we have not yet examined
is a little-known pair of positive by-products of the act of concession:
feelings of greater responsibility for, and satisfaction with, the arrangement. It is this set of sweet side effects that enables the technique to
move its victims to fulfill their agreements and to engage in further
such agreements.
The desirable side effects of making a concession during an interaction
with another person are nicely shown in studies of the way people
bargain with each other. One experiment, conducted by social psychologists at UCLA, offers an especially apt demonstration.17 A subject in
that study faced a “negotiation opponent” and was told to bargain with
the opponent concerning how to divide between themselves a certain
amount of money provided by the experimenters. The subject was also
informed that if no mutual agreement could be reached after a certain
period of bargaining, no one would get any money. Unknown to the
subjects, the opponent was really an experimental assistant who had

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 37
been previously instructed to bargain with the subject in one of three
ways. With some of the subjects, the opponent made an extreme first
demand, assigning virtually all of the money to himself, and stubbornly
persisted in that demand throughout the negotiations. With another
group of subjects, the opponent began with a demand that was moderately favorable to himself; he, too, steadfastly refused to move from
that position during the negotiations. With a third group, the opponent
began with the extreme demand and then gradually retreated to the
more moderate one during the course of the bargaining.
There were three important findings in this experiment that help us
to understand why the rejection-then-retreat technique is so effective.
First, compared to the two other approaches, the strategy of starting
with an extreme demand and then retreating to the more moderate one
produced the most money for the person using it. But this result is not
very surprising in light of the previous evidence we have seen of the
power of larger-then-smaller-request tactics to bring about profitable
agreements. It is the two additional findings of the study that are more
striking.
Responsibility. Those subjects facing the opponent who used the retreating strategy felt most responsible for the final deal. Much more
than the subjects who faced a nonchanging negotiation opponent, these
subjects reported that they had successfully influenced the opponent
to take less money for himself. Of course, we know that they hadn’t
done any such thing. The experimenter had instructed their opponent
to retreat gradually from his initial demand no matter what the subjects
did. But it appeared to these subjects that they had made the opponent
change, that they had produced his concessions. The result was that they
felt more responsible for the final outcome of the negotiations. It does
not require much of a leap from this finding to clarify the previous
mystery of why the rejection-then-retreat technique causes its targets
to live up to their agreements with such astounding frequency. The requester’s concession within the technique not only causes targets to say
yes more often, it also causes them to feel more responsible for having
“dictated” the final agreement. Thus the uncanny ability of the rejectionthen-retreat technique to make its targets meet their commitments becomes understandable: A person who feels responsible for the terms
of a contract will be more likely to live up to that contract.
Satisfaction. Even though, on the average, they gave the most money
to the opponent who used the concessions strategy, the subjects who
were the targets of this strategy were the most satisfied with the final
arrangement. It appears that an agreement that has been forged through
the concessions of one’s opponent is quite satisfying. With this in mind,
we can begin to explain the second previously puzzling feature of the

38 / Influence
rejection-then-retreat tactic—the ability to prompt its victims to agree
to further requests. Since the tactic uses a concession to bring about
compliance, the victim is likely to feel more satisfied with the arrangement as a result. And it stands to reason that people who are satisfied
with a given arrangement are more likely to be willing to agree to further
such arrangements.

HOW TO SAY NO
When up against a requester who employs the rule for reciprocation,
you and I face a formidable foe. Whether by presenting us with an initial
favor or initial concession, the requester will have enlisted a powerful
ally in the campaign for our compliance. At first glance, our fortunes
in such a situation would appear dismal. We could comply with the
requester’s wish and, in so doing, succumb to the reciprocity rule. Or,
we could refuse to comply and thereby suffer the brunt of the rule’s
force upon our deeply conditioned feelings of fairness and obligation.
Surrender or suffer heavy casualties. Cheerless prospects indeed.
Fortunately, these are not our only choices. With the proper understanding of the nature of our opponent, we can come away from the
compliance battlefield unhurt and sometimes even better off than before.
It is essential to recognize that the requester who invokes the reciprocation rule (or any other weapon of influence) to gain our compliance is
not the real opponent. Such a requester has chosen to become a jujitsu
warrior who aligns himself with the sweeping power of reciprocation
and then merely releases that power by providing a first favor or concession. The real opponent is the rule. If we are not to be abused by it,
we must take steps to defuse its energy.
But how does one go about neutralizing the effect of a social rule like
that for reciprocation? It seems too widespread to escape and too strong
to overpower once it is activated. Perhaps the answer, then, is to prevent
its activation. Perhaps we can avoid a confrontation with the rule by
refusing to allow the requester to commission its force against us in the
first place. Perhaps by rejecting the requester’s initial favor or concession
to us, we can evade the problem. Perhaps; but then, perhaps not. Invariably declining the requester’s initial offer of a favor or sacrifice works
better in theory than in practice. The major problem is that when it is
first presented, it is difficult to know whether such an offer is honest
or whether it is the initial step in an exploitation attempt. If we always
assume the worst, it would not be possible to receive the benefits of
any legitimate favors or concessions offered by individuals who had
no intention of exploiting the reciprocity rule.
I have a colleague who remembers with anger how his ten-year-old

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 39
daughter’s feelings were terribly hurt by a man whose method of
avoiding the jaws of the reciprocity rule was to refuse abruptly her
kindness. The children of her class were hosting an open house at school
for their grandparents, and her job was to give a flower to each visitor
entering the school grounds. But the first man she approached with a
flower growled at her, “Keep it.” Not knowing what to do, she extended
it toward him again only to have him demand to know what he had to
give in return. When she replied weakly, “Nothing. It’s a gift,” he fixed
her with a disbelieving glare, insisted that he recognized “her game,”
and brushed on past. The girl was so stung by the experience that she
could not approach anyone else and had to be removed from her assignment—one she had anticipated fondly. It is hard to know whom to
blame more here, the insensitive man or the exploiters who had abused
his mechanical tendency to reciprocate a gift until his response had
soured to a mechanical refusal. No matter whom you find more
blameworthy, the lesson is clear. We will always encounter authentically
generous individuals as well as many people who try to play fairly by
the reciprocity rule rather than to exploit it. They will doubtless become
insulted by someone who consistently rejects their efforts; social friction
and isolation could well result. A policy of blanket rejection, then, seems
ill advised.
Another solution holds more promise. It advises us to accept the desirable first offers of others but to accept those offers only for what they
fundamentally are, not for what they are represented to be. If a person
offers us a nice favor, let’s say, we might well accept, recognizing that
we have obligated ourselves to a return favor sometime in the future.
To engage in this sort of arrangement with another is not to be exploited
by that person through the rule for reciprocation. Quite the contrary;
it is to participate fairly in the “honored network of obligation” that
has served us so well, both individually and societally, from the dawn
of humanity. However, if the initial favor turns out to be a device, a
trick, an artifice designed specifically to stimulate our compliance with
a larger return favor, that is a different story. Here our partner is not a
benefactor but a profiteer. And it is here that we should respond to his
action on precisely those terms. Once we have determined that his initial
offer was not a favor but a compliance tactic, we need only react to it
accordingly to be free of its influence. As long as we perceive and define
his action as a compliance device instead of a favor, he no longer has
the reciprocation rule as an ally: The rule says that favors are to be met
with favors; it does not require that tricks be met with favors.
A practical example may make things more concrete. Let’s suppose
that a woman phoned one day and introduced herself as a member of

40 / Influence
the Home Fire Safety Association in your town. Suppose she then asked
if you would be interested in learning about home fire safety, having
your house checked for fire hazards, and receiving a home fire extinguisher, all free of charge. Let’s suppose further that you were interested
in these things and made an evening appointment to have one of the
Association’s inspectors come over to provide them. When he arrived,
he gave you a small hand extinguisher and began examining the possible
fire hazards of your home. Afterward, he gave you some interesting,
though frightening, information about general fire dangers, along with
an assessment of your home’s vulnerability. Finally, he suggested that
you get a home fire-warning system and left.
Such a set of events is not implausible. Various cities and towns have
nonprofit associations, usually made up of Fire Department personnel
working on their own time, that provide free home fire-safety inspections of this sort. Were these events to occur, you would clearly have
been done a favor by the inspector. In accordance with the reciprocation
rule, you should stand more ready to provide a return favor if you were
to see him in need of aid at some point in the future. An exchange of
favors of this kind would be in the best tradition of the reciprocity rule.
A similar set of events with, however, a different ending would also
be possible—in fact, more likely. Rather than leaving after recommending a fire-alarm system, the inspector would launch into a sales
presentation intended to persuade you to buy an expensive, heattriggered alarm system manufactured by the company he represented.
Door-to-door home fire-alarm companies will frequently use this approach. Typically, their product, while effective enough, will be overpriced. Trusting that you will not be familiar with the retail costs of
such a system and that, if you decide to buy one, you will feel obligated
to the company that provided you with a free extinguisher and home
inspection, these companies will pressure you for an immediate sale.
Using this free-information-and-inspection gambit, fire-protection sales
organizations have flourished around the country.18
If you were to find yourself in such a situation with the realization
that the primary motive of the inspector’s visit was to sell you a costly
alarm system, your most effective next action would be a simple, private
maneuver. It would involve the mental act of redefinition. Merely define
whatever you have received from the inspector—extinguisher, safety
information, hazard inspection—not as gifts, but as sales devices, and
you will be free to decline (or accept) his purchase offer without even
a tug from the reciprocity rule: A favor rightly follows a favor—not a
piece of sales strategy. And if he subsequently responds to your refusal
by proposing that you, at least, give him the names of some friends he
might call on, use your mental maneuver on him again. Define his retreat

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 41
to this smaller request as what (it is hoped after reading this chapter)
you recognize it to be—a compliance tactic. Once done, there would be
no pressure to offer the names as a return concession, since his reduced
request would not be viewed as a real concession. At this point, unhampered by an inappropriately triggered sense of obligation, you may
once again be as compliant or noncompliant as you wish.
Provided you are so inclined, you might even turn his own weapon
of influence against him. Recall that the rule for reciprocation entitles
a person who has acted in a certain way to a dose of the same thing. If
you have determined that the “fire inspector’s” gifts were used, not as
genuine gifts, but to make a profit from you, then you might want to
use them to make a profit of your own. Simply take whatever the inspector is willing to provide—safety information, home extinguisher—thank him politely, and show him out the door. After all, the reciprocity rule asserts that if justice is to be done, exploitation attempts
should be exploited.
READER’S REPORT

From a Former TV and Stereo Salesperson
“For quite a while, I worked for a major retailer in their Television and
Stereo Department. Salespeople in this department are paid on a commission basis; however, continued employment was, and still is, based
on the ability to sell service contracts rather than merchandise. Company
policy was that, for every ten sales you made, you had to sell at least
four service contracts. Failure to bring your service-contract sales up
to expected levels for two consecutive months resulted in threats, relocation, or termination.
“Once I recognized the importance of meeting my sales-contract
quota, I devised a plan that used the rejection-then-retreat technique,
although I didn’t know its name at the time: A customer had the opportunity to buy from one to three years’ worth of service-contract coverage
at the time of the sale. Most of the sales staff attempted just to sell a
single-year policy. That was my intention as well, since a one-year
contract counted just as much toward my quota as a three-year contract
did. Initially, however, when making my sales pitch, I would advocate
the longest and most expensive plan, realizing that most people would
not be willing to spend that much (about $140). But this gave me an
excellent opportunity later, after being rejected in my sincere attempt
to sell the three-year plan, to retreat to the one-year extension and its
relatively small $34.95 price, which I was thrilled to get. This proved
highly effective, as I sold sales contracts to an average of seventy percent
of my customers, who seemed very satisfied with the purchase while

42 / Influence
others in my department clustered around forty percent. I never told
anyone how I did it until now.”
Notice how, as is usually the case, use of the rejection-then-retreat
tactic engages the action of the contrast principle as well. Not only did
the $140 initial request make the $34.95 request seem like a retreat, it
made that second request seem smaller too.

Chapter 3
COMMITMENT AND
CONSISTENCY
Hobgoblins of the Mind
It is easier to resist at the beginning than at the end.
—LEONARDO DA VINCI

A something fascinating about people at the racetrack: Just after

STUDY DONE BY A PAIR OF CANADIAN PSYCHOLOGISTS UNCOVERED

placing a bet, they are much more confident of their horse’s chances of
winning than they are immediately before laying down that bet.1 Of
course, nothing about the horse’s chances actually shifts; it’s the same
horse, on the same track, in the same field; but in the minds of those
bettors, its prospects improve significantly once that ticket is purchased.
Although a bit puzzling at first glance, the reason for the dramatic
change has to do with a common weapon of social influence. Like the
other weapons of influence, this one lies deep within us, directing our
actions with quiet power. It is, quite simply, our nearly obsessive desire
to be (and to appear) consistent with what we have already done. Once
we have made a choice or taken a stand, we will encounter personal
and interpersonal pressures to behave consistently with that commitment. Those pressures will cause us to respond in ways that justify our
earlier decision.
Take the bettors in the racetrack experiment. Thirty seconds before
putting down their money, they had been tentative and uncertain; thirty
seconds after the deed, they were significantly more optimistic and selfassured. The act of making a final decision—in this case, of buying a

44 / Influence
ticket—had been the critical factor. Once a stand had been taken, the
need for consistency pressured these people to bring what they felt and
believed into line with what they had already done. They simply convinced themselves that they had made the right choice and, no doubt,
felt better about it all.
Before we see such self-delusion as unique to racetrack habitus, we
should examine the story of my neighbor Sara and her live-in boyfriend,
Tim. They met at a hospital where he worked as an X-ray technician
and she as a nutritionist. They dated for a while, even after Tim lost his
job, and eventually they moved in together. Things were never perfect
for Sara: She wanted Tim to marry her and to stop his heavy drinking;
Tim resisted both ideas. After an especially difficult period of conflict,
Sara broke off the relationship, and Tim moved out. At the same time,
an old boyfriend of Sara’s returned to town after years away and called
her. They started seeing each other socially and quickly became serious
enough to plan a wedding. They had gone so far as to set a date and
issue invitations when Tim called. He had repented and wanted to
move back in. When Sara told him her marriage plans, he begged her
to change her mind; he wanted to be together with her as before. But
Sara refused, saying she didn’t want to live like that again. Tim even
offered to marry her, but she still said she preferred the other boyfriend.
Finally, Tim volunteered to quit drinking if she would only relent.
Feeling that under those conditions Tim had the edge, Sara decided to
break her engagement, cancel the wedding, retract the invitations, and
let Tim move back in with her.
Within a month, Tim informed Sara that he didn’t think he needed
to stop his drinking after all; a month later, he had decided that they
should “wait and see” before getting married. Two years have since
passed; Tim and Sara continue to live together exactly as before. He
still drinks, there are still no marriage plans, yet Sara is more devoted
to Tim than she ever was. She says that being forced to choose taught
her that Tim really is number one in her heart. So, after choosing Tim
over her other boyfriend, Sara became happier with him, even though
the conditions under which she had made her choice have never been
fulfilled. Obviously, horse-race bettors are not alone in their willingness
to believe in the correctness of a difficult choice, once made. Indeed,
we all fool ourselves from time to time in order to keep our thoughts
and beliefs consistent with what we have already done or decided.
Psychologists have long understood the power of the consistency
principle to direct human action. Prominent theorists such as Leon
Festinger, Fritz Hieder, and Theodore Newcomb have viewed the desire
for consistency as a central motivator of our behavior. But is this tend-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 45
ency to be consistent really strong enough to compel us to do what we
ordinarily would not want to do? There is no question about it. The
drive to be (and look) consistent constitutes a highly potent weapon of
social influence, often causing us to act in ways that are clearly contrary
to our own best interests.
Take, as proof, what happened when psychologist Thomas Moriarty
staged thefts on a New York City beach to see if onlookers would risk
personal harm to halt the crime. In the study, a research accomplice
would put a beach blanket down five feet from the blanket of a randomly chosen individual—the experimental subject. After a couple of
minutes on the blanket spent relaxing and listening to music from a
portable radio, the accomplice would stand up and leave the blanket
to stroll down the beach. A few minutes later, a second researcher,
pretending to be a thief, would approach, grab the radio, and try to
hurry away with it. As you might guess, under normal conditions,
subjects were very reluctant to put themselves in harm’s way by challenging the thief—only four people did so in the twenty times, that the
theft was staged. But when the same procedure was tried another twenty
times, with a slight twist, the results were drastically different. In these
incidents, before taking his stroll, the accomplice would simply ask the
subject to please “watch my things,” which each of them agreed to do.
Now, propelled by the rule for consistency, nineteen of the twenty
subjects became virtual vigilantes, running after and stopping the thief,
demanding an explanation, and often restraining the thief physically
or snatching the radio away.
To understand why consistency is so powerful a motive, it is important to recognize that in most circumstances consistency is valued and
adaptive. Inconsistency is commonly thought to be an undesirable
personality trait. The person whose beliefs, words, and deeds don’t
match may be seen as indecisive, confused, two-faced, or even mentally
ill. On the other side, a high degree of consistency is normally associated
with personal and intellectual strength. It is at the heart of logic, rationality, stability, and honesty. A quote attributed to the great British
chemist Michael Faraday suggests the extent to which being consistent
is approved—sometimes more than being right. When asked after a
lecture if he meant to imply that a hated academic rival was always
wrong, Faraday glowered at the questioner and replied, “He’s not that
consistent.”
Certainly, then, good personal consistency is highly valued in our
culture. And well it should be. It provides us with a reasonable and
gainful orientation to the world. Most of the time we will be better off
if our approach to things is well laced with consistency. Without it our
lives would be difficult, erratic, and disjointed.

46 / Influence
But because it is so typically in our best interests to be consistent, we
easily fall into the habit of being automatically so, even in situations
where it is not the sensible way to be. When it occurs unthinkingly,
consistency can be disastrous. Nonetheless, even blind consistency has
its attractions.
First, like most other forms of automatic responding, it offers a
shortcut through the density of modern life. Once we have made up
our minds about an issue, stubborn consistency allows us a very appealing luxury: We really don’t have to think hard about the issue anymore.
We don’t have to sift through the blizzard of information we encounter
every day to identify relevant facts; we don’t have to expend the mental
energy to weigh the pros and cons; we don’t have to make any further
tough decisions. Instead, all we have to do when confronted with the
issue is to turn on our consistency tape, whirr, and we know just what
to believe, say, or do. We need only believe, say, or do whatever is
consistent with our earlier decision.
The allure of such a luxury is not to be minimized. It allows us a
convenient, relatively effortless, and efficient method for dealing with
complex daily environments that make severe demands on our mental
energies and capacities. It is not hard to understand, then, why automatic consistency is a difficult reaction to curb. It offers us a way to evade
the rigors of continuing thought. And as Sir Joshua Reynolds noted,
“There is no expedient to which a man will not resort to avoid the real
labor of thinking.” With our consistency tapes operating, then, we can
go about our business happily excused from the toil of having to think
too much.
There is a second, more perverse attraction of mechanical consistency
as well. Sometimes it is not the effort of hard, cognitive work that makes
us shirk thoughtful activity, but the harsh consequences of that activity.
Sometimes it is the cursedly clear and unwelcome set of answers
provided by straight thinking that makes us mental slackers. There are
certain disturbing things we simply would rather not realize. Because
it is a preprogrammed and mindless method of responding, automatic
consistency can supply a safe hiding place from those troubling realizations. Sealed within the fortress walls of rigid consistency, we can be
impervious to the sieges of reason.
One night at an introductory lecture given by the transcendental
meditation (TM) program, I witnessed a nice illustration of how people
will hide inside the walls of consistency to protect themselves from the
troublesome consequences of thought. The lecture itself was presided
over by two earnest young men and was designed to recruit new

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 47
members into the program. The program claimed it could teach a unique
brand of meditation that would allow us to achieve all manner of desirable things, ranging from simple inner peace to the more spectacular
abilities to fly and pass through walls at the program’s advanced (and
more expensive) stages.
I had decided to attend the meeting to observe the kind of compliance
tactics used in recruitment lectures of this sort and had brought along
an interested friend, a university professor whose areas of specialization
were statistics and symbolic logic. As the meeting progressed and the
lecturers explained the theory behind TM, I noticed my logician friend
becoming increasingly restless. Looking more and more pained and
shifting about constantly in his seat, he was finally unable to resist.
When the leaders called for questions at the completion of the lecture,
he raised his hand and gently but surely demolished the presentation
we had just heard. In less than two minutes, he pointed out precisely
where and why the lecturers’ complex argument was contradictory, illogical, and unsupportable. The effect on the discussion leaders was
devastating. After a confused silence, each attempted a weak reply only
to halt midway to confer with his partner and finally to admit that my
colleague’s points were good ones “requiring further study.”
More interesting to me, though, was the effect upon the rest of the
audience. At the end of the question period, the two recruiters were
faced with a crush of audience members submitting their seventy-fivedollar down payments for admission to the TM program. Nudging,
shrugging, and chuckling to one another as they took in the payments,
the recruiters betrayed signs of giddy bewilderment. After what appeared to have been an embarrassingly clear collapse of their presentation, the meeting had somehow turned into a great success, generating
mystifyingly high levels of compliance from the audience. Although
more than a bit puzzled, I chalked up the audience response to a failure
to understand the logic of my colleague’s arguments. As it turned out,
however, just the reverse was the case.
Outside the lecture room after the meeting, we were approached by
three members of the audience, each of whom had given a down payment immediately after the lecture. They wanted to know why we had
come to the session. We explained, and we asked the same question of
them. One was an aspiring actor who wanted desperately to succeed
at his craft and had come to the meeting to learn if TM would allow
him to achieve the necessary self-control to master the art; the recruiters
had assured him that it would. The second described herself as a severe
insomniac who had hopes that TM would provide her with a way to
relax and fall asleep easily at night. The third served as unofficial
spokesman. He also had a sleep-related problem. He was failing college

48 / Influence
because there didn’t seem to be enough time to study. He had come to
the meeting to find out if TM could help by training him to need fewer
hours of sleep each night; the additional time could then be used for
study. It is interesting to note that the recruiters informed him as well
as the insomniac that Transcendental Meditation techniques could solve
their respective, though opposite, problems.
Still thinking that the three must have signed up because they hadn’t
understood the points made by my logician friend, I began to question
them about aspects of his argument. To my surprise, I found that they
had understood his comments quite well; in fact, all too well. It was
precisely the cogency of his argument that drove them to sign up for
the program on the spot. The spokesman put it best: “Well, I wasn’t
going to put down any money tonight because I’m really quite broke
right now; I was going to wait until the next meeting. But when your
buddy started talking, I knew I’d better give them my money now, or
I’d go home and start thinking about what he said and never sign up.”
All at once, things began to make sense. These were people with real
problems; and they were somewhat desperately searching for a way to
solve those problems. They were seekers who, if our discussion leaders
were to be believed, had found a potential solution in TM. Driven by
their needs, they very much wanted to believe that TM was their answer.
Now, in the form of my colleague, intrudes the voice of reason,
showing the theory underlying their newfound solution to be unsound.
Panic! Something must be done at once before logic takes its toll and
leaves them without hope again. Quickly, quickly, walls against reason
are needed; and it doesn’t matter that the fortress to be erected is a
foolish one. “Quick, a hiding place from thought! Here, take this money.
Whew, safe in the nick of time. No need to think about the issues any
longer. The decision has been made, and from now on the consistency
tape can be played whenever necessary: ‘TM? Certainly I think it will
help me; certainly I expect to continue; certainly I believe in TM. I
already put my money down for it, didn’t I?’ Ah, the comforts of
mindless consistency. I’ll just rest right here for a while. It’s so much
nicer than the worry and strain of that hard, hard search.”
If, as it appears, automatic consistency functions as a shield against
thought, it should not be surprising that such consistency can also be
exploited by those who would prefer that we not think too much in
response to their requests for our compliance. For the exploiters, whose
interest will be served by an unthinking, mechanical reaction to their
requests, our tendency for automatic consistency is a gold mine. So
clever are they at arranging to have us play our consistency tapes when
it profits them that we seldom realize we have been taken. In fine jujitsu

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 49
fashion, they structure their interactions with us so that our own need
to be consistent will lead directly to their benefit.
Certain large toy manufacturers use just such an approach to reduce
a problem caused by seasonal buying patterns. Of course, the boom
time for toy sales occurs before and during the Christmas holiday season. The toy companies make fat profits during this period. Their
problem is that toy sales then go into a terrible slump for the next couple
of months. Their customers have already spent the full amount in their
toy budgets and are stiffly resistant to their children’s pleas for more.
Even those children whose birthdays fall soon after the holidays receive
fewer toys because of the recent Christmas spree.
So the toy manufacturers are faced with a dilemma: how to keep sales
high during the peak season and, at the same time, retain a healthy
demand for toys in the immediately following months. Their difficulty
certainly doesn’t lie in convincing our naturally insatiable offspring to
want a continuous flow of new amusements. A series of flashy television
commercials placed among the Saturday morning cartoon shows will
produce the usual amounts of begging, whining, and wheedling no
matter when it appears during the year. No, the problem is not in motivating kids to want more toys after Christmas.
The problem is in motivating postholiday spent-out parents to reach
down for the price of yet another plaything for their already toy-glutted
children. What could the toy companies possibly do to produce that
unlikely behavior? Some have tried a greatly increased advertising
campaign, others have reduced prices during the slack period, but
neither of those standard sales devices has proved successful. Not only
are both tactics costly, but both have also been ineffective in increasing
sales to desired levels. Parents are simply not in a toy-buying mood,
and the influences of advertising or reduced expense are not enough
to shake that stony resistance.
Certain large toy manufacturers, however, think they have found a
solution. It’s an ingenious one, involving no more than a normal advertising expense and an understanding of the powerful pull of the need
for consistency. My first hint of how the toy companies’ strategy worked
came after I fell for it and then, in true patsy form, fell for it again.
It was January, and I was in the town’s largest toy store. After purchasing all too many gifts there for my son a month before, I had sworn
not to enter that place or any like it for a long, long time. Yet there I
was, not only in the diabolic place but also in the process of buying my
son another expensive toy—a big, electric road-race set. In front of the
road-race display, I happened to meet a former neighbor who was
buying his son the same toy. The odd thing was that we almost never
saw each other anymore. In fact, the last time was a year earlier in that

50 / Influence
same store where we were both buying our sons an expensive postChristmas gift—that time a robot that walked, talked, and laid waste.
We laughed about our strange pattern of seeing each other only once
a year at the same time, in the same place, while doing the same thing.
Later that day, I mentioned the coincidence to a friend who, it turned
out, had once worked in the toy business.
“No coincidence,” he said knowingly.
“What do you mean, ‘No coincidence’?”
“Look,” he said, “let me ask you a couple of questions about the roadrace set you bought this year. First, did you promise your son that he’d
get one for Christmas?”
“Well, yes, I did. Christopher had seen a bunch of ads for them on
the Saturday morning cartoon shows and said that was what he wanted
for Christmas. I saw a couple of the ads myself and it looked like fun,
so I said okay.”
“Strike one,” he announced. “Now for my second question. When
you went to buy one, did you find all the stores sold out?”
“That’s right, I did! The stores said they’d ordered some but didn’t
know when they’d get any more in. So I had to buy Christopher some
other toys to make up for the road-race set. But how did you know?”
“Strike two,” he said. “Just let me ask one more question. Didn’t this
same sort of thing happen the year before with the robot toy?”
“Wait a minute…you’re right. That’s just what happened. This is incredible. How did you know?”
“No psychic powers; I just happen to know how several of the big
toy companies jack up their January and February sales. They start
prior to Christmas with attractive TV ads for certain special toys. The
kids, naturally, want what they see and extract Christmas promises for
these items from their parents. Now here’s where the genius of the
companies’ plan comes in: They undersupply the stores with the toys
they’ve gotten the parents to promise. Most parents find those things
sold out and are forced to substitute other toys of equal value. The toy
manufacturers, of course, make a point of supplying the stores with
plenty of these substitutes. Then, after Christmas, the companies start
running the ads again for the other, special toys. That juices up the kids
to want those toys more than ever. They go running to their parents
whining, ‘You promised, you promised,’ and the adults go trudging
off to the store to live up dutifully to their words.”
“Where,” I said, beginning to seethe now, “they meet other parents
they haven’t seen for a year, falling for the same trick, right?”
“Right. Uh, where are you going?”
“I’m going to take that road-race set right back to the store.” I was
so angry I was nearly shouting.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 51
“Wait. Think for a minute first. Why did you buy it this morning?”
“Because I didn’t want to let Christopher down and because I wanted
to teach him that promises are to be lived up to.”
“Well, has any of that changed? Look, if you take his toy away now,
he won’t understand why. He’ll just know that his father broke a
promise to him. Is that what you want?”
“No,” I said, sighing, “I guess not. So, you’re telling me that they
doubled their profit on me for the past two years, and I never even
knew it; and now that I do, I’m still trapped—by my own words. So,
what you’re really telling me is, ‘Strike three.’”
He nodded, “And you’re out.”

COMMITMENT IS THE KEY
Once we realize that the power of consistency is formidable in directing
human action, an important practical question immediately arises: How
is that force engaged? What produces the click that activates the whirr
of the powerful consistency tape? Social psychologists think they know
the answer: commitment. If I can get you to make a commitment (that
is, to take a stand, to go on record), I will have set the stage for your
automatic and ill-considered consistency with that earlier commitment.
Once a stand is taken, there is a natural tendency to behave in ways
that are stubbornly consistent with the stand.
As we’ve already seen, social psychologists are not the only ones who
understand the connection between commitment and consistency.
Commitment strategies are aimed at us by compliance professionals of
nearly every sort. Each of the strategies is intended to get us to take
some action or make some statement that will trap us into later compliance through consistency pressures. Procedures designed to create
commitment take various forms. Some are fairly straightforward; others
are among the most subtle compliance tactics we will encounter.
For instance, suppose you wanted to increase the number of people
in your area who would agree to go door-to-door collecting donations
for your favorite charity. You would be wise to study the approach
taken by social psychologist Steven J. Sherman. He simply called a
sample of Bloomington, Indiana, residents as part of a survey he was
taking and asked them to predict what they would say if asked to spend
three hours collecting money for the American Cancer Society. Of
course, not wanting to seem uncharitable to the survey taker or to
themselves, many of these people said that they would volunteer. The
consequence of this sly commitment procedure was a 700 percent increase in volunteers when, a few days later, a representative of the
American Cancer Society did call and ask for neighborhood canvassers.

52 / Influence
Using the same strategy, but this time asking Columbus, Ohio, residents
to predict whether they would vote on Election Day, a team of researchers led by Anthony Greenwald were able to increase significantly the
turnout in a U.S. presidential election among those called.
Perhaps an even more crafty commitment technique has been developed recently by telephone solicitors for charity. Have you noticed
that callers asking you to contribute to some cause or another these
days seem to begin things by inquiring about your current health and
well-being? “Hello Mr./Ms. Targetperson,” they say. “How are you
feeling this evening?” Or, “How are you doing today?” The caller’s intent with this sort of introduction is not merely to seem friendly and
caring. It is to get you to respond—as you normally do to such polite,
superficial inquiries—with a polite, superficial comment of your own:
“Just fine” or “Real good” or “I’m doing great, thanks.” Once you have
publicly stated that all is well, it becomes much easier for the solicitor
to corner you into aiding those for whom all is not well: “I’m glad to
hear that, because I’m calling to ask if you’d be willing to make a
donation to help out the unfortunate victims of…”
The theory behind this tactic is that people who have just asserted
that they are doing/feeling fine—even as a routine part of a sociable
exchange—will consequently find it awkward to appear stingy in the
context of their own admittedly favored circumstances. If all this sounds
a bit farfetched, consider the findings of consumer researcher Daniel
Howard, who put the theory to test. Dallas, Texas, residents were called
on the phone and asked if they would agree to allow a representative
of the Hunger Relief Committee to come to their homes to sell them
cookies, the proceeds from which would be used to supply meals for
the needy. When tried alone, that request (labeled the “standard solicitation approach”) produced only 18 percent agreement. However, if the
caller initially asked, “How are you feeling this evening?” and waited
for a reply before proceeding to the standard approach, several noteworthy things happened. First, of the 120 individuals called, most (108)
gave the customary favorable reply (“Good,” “Fine,” “Real well,” etc.).
Second, 32 percent of the people who got the “How are you feeling tonight” question agreed to receive the cookie seller at their homes, nearly
twice the success rate of the standard solicitation approach. Third, true
to the consistency principle, almost everyone who agreed to such a
visit did, in fact, make a cookie purchase when contacted at home (89
percent).
To make sure that this tactic doesn’t generate its successes simply
because a solicitor who uses it seems more concerned and courteous
than one who doesn’t use it, Howard conducted another study. This
time callers began either with the question “How are you feeling this

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 53
evening?” (and waited for a response before proceeding) or with the
statement “I hope you are feeling well this evening” and then proceeded
to the standard solicitation approach. Despite the fact that the caller
started each type of interaction with a warm and friendly comment,
the “How are you feeling” technique was, by far, superior to its rival
(33 percent vs. 15 percent compliance), because it alone drew an exploitable public commitment from its targets. Note that the commitment
was able to get twice as much compliance from those targets even
though at the time it occurred it must have seemed to them an altogether
inconsequential reply to an altogether superficial question—yet another
fine example of social jujitsu at work.
The question of what makes a commitment effective has a number
of answers. A variety of factors affect the ability of a commitment to
constrain our future behavior. One large-scale program designed to
produce compliance illustrates nicely how several of the factors work.
The remarkable thing about this program is that it was systematically
employing these factors decades ago, well before scientific research had
identified them.
During the Korean War, many captured American soldiers found
themselves in prisoner-of-war (POW) camps run by the Chinese Communists. It became clear early in the conflict that the Chinese treated
captives quite differently than did their allies, the North Koreans, who
favored savagery and harsh punishment to gain compliance. Specifically
avoiding the appearance of brutality, the Red Chinese engaged in what
they termed their “lenient policy,” which was in reality a concerted and
sophisticated psychological assault on their captives. After the war,
American psychologists questioned the returning prisoners intensively
to determine what had occurred. The intensive psychological investigation took place, in part, because of the unsettling success of some aspects of the Chinese program. For example, the Chinese were very effective in getting Americans to inform on one another, in striking contrast to the behavior of American POWs in World War II. For this
reason, among others, escape plans were quickly uncovered and the
escape attempts themselves almost always unsuccessful. “When an escape did occur,” wrote Dr. Edgar Schein, a principal American investigator of the Chinese indoctrination program in Korea, “the Chinese
usually recovered the man easily by offering a bag of rice to anyone
turning him in.” In fact, nearly all American prisoners in the Chinese
camps are said to have collaborated with the enemy in one form or another.2
An examination of the Chinese prison-camp program shows that its
personnel relied heavily on commitment and consistency pressures to

54 / Influence
gain the desired compliance from prisoners. Of course, the first problem
facing the Chinese was how to get any collaboration at all from the
Americans. These were men who were trained to provide nothing but
name, rank, and serial number. Short of physical brutalization, how
could the captors hope to get such men to give military information,
turn in fellow prisoners, or publicly denounce their country? The
Chinese answer was elementary: Start small and build.
For instance, prisoners were frequently asked to make statements so
mildly anti-American or pro-Communist as to seem inconsequential
(“The United States is not perfect.” “In a Communist country, unemployment is not a problem.”). But once these minor requests were
complied with, the men found themselves pushed to submit to related
yet more substantive requests. A man who had just agreed with his
Chinese interrogator that the United States is not perfect might then be
asked to indicate some of the ways in which he thought this was the
case. Once he had so explained himself, he might be asked to make a
list of these “problems with America” and to sign his name to it. Later
he might be asked to read his list in a discussion group with other
prisoners. “After all, it’s what you really believe, isn’t it?” Still later he
might be asked to write an essay expanding on his list and discussing
these problems in greater detail.
The Chinese might then use his name and his essay in an antiAmerican radio broadcast beamed not only to the entire camp, but to
other POW camps in North Korea, as well as to American forces in
South Korea. Suddenly he would find himself a “collaborator,” having
given aid to the enemy. Aware that he had written the essay without
any strong threats or coercion, many times a man would change his
image of himself to be consistent with the deed and with the new “collaborator” label, often resulting in even more extensive acts of collaboration. Thus, while “only a few men were able to avoid collaboration
altogether,” according to Dr. Schein, “the majority collaborated at one
time or another by doing things which seemed to them trivial but which
the Chinese were able to turn to their own advantage…. This was particularly effective in eliciting confessions, self-criticism, and information
during interrogation.”3
If the Chinese know about the subtle power of this approach, it should
not be surprising that another group of people interested in compliance
is also aware of its usefulness. Many business organizations employ it
regularly.
For the salesperson, the strategy is to obtain a large purchase by
starting with a small one. Almost any small sale will do, because the
purpose of that small transaction is not profit. It is commitment. Further

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 55
purchases, even much larger ones, are expected to flow naturally from
the commitment. An article in the trade magazine American Salesman
put it succinctly:
The general idea is to pave the way for full-line distribution by
starting with a small order…. Look at it this way—when a person
has signed an order for your merchandise, even though the profit
is so small it hardly compensates for the time and effort of making
the call, he is no longer a prospect—he is a customer.4
The tactic of starting with a little request in order to gain eventual
compliance with related larger requests has a name: the foot-in-thedoor technique. Social scientists first became aware of its effectiveness
in the mid-1960s when psychologists Jonathan Freedman and Scott
Fraser published an astonishing set of data.5 They reported the results
of an experiment in which a researcher, posing as a volunteer worker,
had gone door to door in a residential California neighborhood making
a preposterous request of homeowners. The homeowners were asked
to allow a public-service billboard to be installed on their front lawns.
To get an idea of just how the sign would look, they were shown a
photograph depicting an attractive house, the view of which was almost
completely obscured by a very large, poorly lettered sign reading DRIVE
CAREFULLY. Although the request was normally and understandably
refused by the great majority (83 percent) of the other residents in the
area, this particular group of people reacted quite favorably. A full 76
percent of them offered the use of their front yards.
The prime reason for their startling compliance has to do with
something that had happened to them about two weeks earlier: They
had made a small commitment to driver safety. A different volunteer
worker had come to their doors and asked them to accept and display
a little three-inch-square sign that read BE A SAFE DRIVER. It was such a
trifling request that nearly all of them had agreed to it. But the effects
of that request were enormous. Because they had innocently complied
with a trivial safe-driving request a couple of weeks before, these
homeowners became remarkably willing to comply with another such
request that was massive in size.
Freedman and Fraser didn’t stop there. They tried a slightly different
procedure on another sample of homeowners. These people first received a request to sign a petition that favored “keeping California
beautiful.” Of course, nearly everyone signed, since state beauty, like
efficiency in government or sound prenatal care, is one of those issues
almost no one is against. After waiting about two weeks, Freedman
and Fraser sent a new “volunteer worker” to these same homes to ask
the residents to allow the big DRIVE CAREFULLY sign to be erected on

56 / Influence
their lawns. In some ways, their response was the most astounding of
any of the homeowners in the study. Approximately half of these people
consented to the installation of the DRIVE CAREFULLY billboard, even
though the small commitment they had made weeks earlier was not to
driver safety but to an entirely different public-service topic, state
beautification.
At first, even Freedman and Fraser were bewildered by their findings.
Why should the little act of signing a petition supporting state beautification cause people to be so willing to perform a different and much
larger favor? After considering and discarding other explanations,
Freedman and Fraser came upon one that offered a solution to the
puzzle: Signing the beautification petition changed the view these people
had of themselves. They saw themselves as public-spirited citizens who
acted on their civic principles. When, two weeks later, they were asked
to perform another public service by displaying the DRIVE CAREFULLY
sign, they complied in order to be consistent with their newly formed
self-images. According to Freedman and Fraser,
What may occur is a change in the person’s feelings about getting
involved or taking action. Once he has agreed to a request, his attitude may change, he may become, in his own eyes, the kind of
person who does this sort of thing, who agrees to requests made
by strangers, who takes action on things he believes in, who cooperates with good causes.6
What the Freedman and Fraser findings tell us, then, is to be very
careful about agreeing to trivial requests. Such an agreement can not
only increase our compliance with very similar, much larger re-quests,
it can also make us more willing to perform a variety of larger favors
that are only remotely connected to the little one we did earlier. It’s this
second, general kind of influence concealed within small commitments
that scares me.
It scares me enough that I am rarely willing to sign a petition anymore, even for a position I support. Such an action has the potential to
influence not only my future behavior but also my self-image in ways
I may not want. And once a person’s self-image is altered, all sorts of
subtle advantages become available to someone who wants to exploit
that new image.
Who among Freedman and Fraser’s homeowners would have thought
that the “volunteer worker” who asked them to sign a state beautification petition was really interested in having them display a safe-driving
billboard two weeks later? And who among them could have suspected
that their decision to display the billboard was largely due to the act of
signing the petition? No one, I’d guess. If there were any regrets after

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 57
the billboard went up, who could they conceivably hold responsible
but themselves and their own damnably strong civic spirit? They probably
never even considered the guy with the “keeping California beautiful”
petition and all that knowledge of jujitsu.
Notice that all of the foot-in-the-door experts seem to be excited about
the same thing: You can use small commitments to manipulate a person’s self-image; you can use them to turn citizens into “public servants,” prospects into “customers,” prisoners into “collaborators.” And
once you’ve got a man’s self-image where you want it, he should comply
naturally with a whole range of your requests that are consistent with
this view of himself.
Not all commitments affect self-image, however. There are certain
conditions that should be present for a commitment to be effective in
this way. To discover what they are, we can once again look to the
American experience in the Chinese prison camps of Korea. It is important to understand that the major intent of the Chinese was not simply
to extract information from their prisoners. It was to indoctrinate them,
to change their attitudes and percep-tions of themselves, of their political system, of their country’s role in the war, and of communism. And
there is evidence that the program often worked alarmingly well.
Dr. Henry Segal, chief of the neuropsychiatric evaluation team that
examined returning POWs at the war’s end, reported that war-related
beliefs had been substantially shifted. The majority of the men believed
the Chinese story that the United States had used germ warfare, and
many felt that their own forces had been the initial aggressors in starting
the war. Similar inroads had been made in the political attitudes of the
men:
Many expressed antipathy toward the Chinese Communists but
at the same time praised them for “the fine job they have done in
China.” Others stated that “although communism won’t work in
America, I think it’s a good thing for Asia.”7
It appears that the real goal of the Chinese was to modify, at least for
a time, the hearts and minds of their captives. If we measure their
achievement in terms of “defection, disloyalty, changed attitudes and
beliefs, poor discipline, poor morale, poor esprit, and doubts as to
America’s role,” Dr. Segal concluded that “their efforts were highly
successful.” Because commitment tactics were so much a part of the
effective Chinese assault on hearts and minds, it is quite informative
to examine the specific features of the tactics they used.

58 / Influence

The Magic Act
Our best evidence of what people truly feel and believe comes less from
their words than from their deeds. Observers trying to decide what a
man is like look closely at his actions. What the Chinese have discovered
is that the man himself uses this same evidence to decide what he is
like. His behavior tells him about himself; it is a primary source of information about his beliefs and values and attitudes. Understanding
fully this important principle of self-perception, the Chinese set about
arranging the prison-camp experience so that their captives would
consistently act in desired ways. Before long, the Chinese knew, these
actions would begin to take their toll, causing the men to change their
views of themselves to align with what they had done.
Writing was one sort of confirming action that the Chinese urged
incessantly upon the men. It was never enough for the prisoners to
listen quietly or even to agree verbally with the Chinese line; they were
always pushed to write it down as well. So intent were the Chinese on
securing a written statement that if a prisoner was not willing to write
a desired response freely, he was prevailed upon to copy it. The
American psychologist Edgar Schein describes a standard indoctrination
session tactic of the Chinese in these terms:
A further technique was to have the man write out the question
and then the [pro-Communist] answer. If he refused to write it
voluntarily, he was asked to copy it from the notebooks, which
must have seemed like a harmless enough concession.
But, oh, those “harmless” concessions. We’ve already seen how apparently trifling commitments can lead to extraordinary further behavior. And the Chinese knew that, as a commitment device, a written
declaration has some great advantages. First, it provides physical
evidence that the act occurred. Once a man wrote what the Chinese
wanted, it was very difficult for him to believe that he had not done so.
The opportunities to forget or to deny to himself what he had done
were not available, as they are for purely verbal statements. No; there
it was in his own handwriting, an irrevocably documented act driving
him to make his beliefs and his self-image consistent with what he had
undeniably done.
A second advantage of a written testament is that it can be shown to
other people. Of course, that means it can be used to persuade those
people. It can persuade them to change their own attitudes in the direction of the statement. But more important for the purpose of commitment, it can persuade them that the author genuinely believes what

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 59
was written. People have a natural tendency to think that a statement
reflects the true attitude of the person who made it. What is surprising
is that they continue to think so even when they know that the person
did not freely choose to make the statement.
Some scientific evidence that this is the case comes from a study by
psychologists Edward Jones and James Harris, who showed people an
essay that was favorable to Fidel Castro and asked them to guess the
true feelings of its author.8 Jones and Harris told some of these people
that the author had chosen to write a pro-Castro essay; and they told
the other people that the author had been required to write in favor of
Castro. The strange thing was that even those people who knew that
the author had been assigned to do a pro-Castro essay guessed that he
liked Castro. It seems that a statement of belief produces a click, whirr
response in those who view it. Unless there is strong evidence to the
contrary, observers automatically assume that someone who makes
such a statement means it.
Think of the double-barreled effects on the self-image of a prisoner
who wrote a pro-Chinese or anti-American statement. Not only was it
a lasting personal reminder of his action, it was also likely to persuade
those around him that the statement reflected his actual beliefs. And,
as we will see in Chapter 4, what those around us think is true of us is
enormously important in determining what we ourselves think is true.
For example, one study found that after hearing that they were considered charitable people, New Haven, Connecticut, housewives gave
much more money to a canvasser from the Multiple Sclerosis Association.9 Apparently the mere knowledge that someone viewed them as
charitable caused these women to make their actions consistent with
another’s perception of them.
Once an active commitment is made, then, self-image is squeezed
from both sides by consistency pressures. From the inside, there is a
pressure to bring self-image into line with action. From the outside,
there is a sneakier pressure—a tendency to adjust this image according
to the way others perceive us. And because others see us as believing
what we have written (even when we’ve had little choice in the matter),
we will once again experience a pull to bring self-image into line with
the written statement.
In Korea, several subtle devices were used to get the prisoners to
write, without direct coercion, what the Chinese wanted. For example,
the Chinese knew that many prisoners were eager to let their families
know that they were alive. At the same time, the men knew that their
captors were censoring the mails and that only some letters were being
allowed out of camp. To ensure that their own letters would be released,
some prisoners began including in their messages peace appeals, claims

60 / Influence
of kind treatment, and statements sympathetic to communism. The
hope was that the Chinese would want such letters to surface and
would, therefore, allow their delivery. Of course, the Chinese were
happy to cooperate because those letters served their interests marvelously. First, their worldwide propaganda effort benefited greatly
from the appearance of pro-Communist statements by American servicemen. Second, in the service of prisoner indoctrination, they had,
without raising a finger of physical force, gotten many men to go on
record as supporting the Chinese cause.
A similar technique involved political essay contests that were regularly held in camp. The prizes for winning were invariably small—a
few cigarettes or a bit of fruit—but were sufficiently scarce that they
generated a lot of interest from the men. Usually the winning essay was
one that took a solidly pro-Communist stand…but not always. The
Chinese were wise enough to realize that most of the prisoners would
not enter a contest that they could win only by writing a Communist
tract. And the Chinese were clever enough to know how to plant small
commitments to communism in the men that could be nurtured into
later bloom. So the prize was occasionally given to an essay that generally supported the United States but that bowed once or twice to the
Chinese view. The effects of this strategy were exactly what the Chinese
wanted. The men continued to participate voluntarily in the contests
because they saw that they could win with an essay highly favorable
to their own country. But perhaps without realizing it, they began to
shade their essays a bit toward communism in order to have a better
chance of winning. The Chinese were ready to pounce on any concession
to Communist dogma and to bring consistency pressures to bear upon
it. In the case of a written declaration within a voluntary essay, they
had a perfect commitment from which to build toward collaboration
and conversion.
Other compliance professionals also know about the committing
power of written statements. The enormously successful Amway Corporation, for instance, has hit upon a way to spur their sales personnel
to greater and greater accomplishments. Members of the staff are asked
to set individual sales goals and commit themselves to those goals by
personally recording them on paper:
One final tip before you get started: Set a goal and write it down.
Whatever the goal, the important thing is that you set it, so you’ve
got something for which to aim—and that you write it down. There
is something magical about writing things down. So set a goal and

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 61
write it down. When you reach that goal, set another and write
that down. You’ll be off and running.10
If the Amway people have found “something magical about writing
things down,” so have other business organizations. Some door-to-door
sales companies use the magic of written commitments to battle the
“cooling-off” laws recently passed in many states. The laws are designed
to allow customers a few days after purchasing an item to cancel the
sale and receive a full refund. At first this legislation hurt the hard-sell
companies deeply. Because they emphasize high-pressure tactics, their
customers often buy, not because they want the product but because
they are duped or intimidated into the sale. When the new laws went
into effect, these customers began canceling in droves.
The companies have since learned a beautifully simple trick that cuts
the number of such cancellations drastically. They merely have the
customer, rather than the salesman, fill out the sales agreement. According to the sales-training program of a prominent encyclopedia company,
that personal commitment alone has proved to be “a very important
psychological aid in preventing customers from backing out of their
contracts.” Like the Amway Corporation, then, these organizations
have found that something special happens when people personally
put their commitments on paper: They live up to what they have written
down.
Another common way for businesses to cash in on the “magic” of
written declarations occurs through the use of an innocent-looking
promotional device. Before I began to study weapons of social influence,
I used to wonder why big companies such as Procter & Gamble and
General Foods are always running those “25-, 50-, or 100 words or less”
testimonial contests. They all seem to be alike. The contestant is to
compose a short personal statement that begins with the words, “Why
I like…” and goes on to laud the features of whatever cake mix or floor
wax happens to be at issue. The company judges the entries and awards
some stunningly large prizes to the winners. What had puzzled me was
what the companies got out of the deal. Often the contest requires no
purchase; anyone submitting an entry is eligible. Yet, the companies
appear to be strangely willing to incur the huge costs of contest after
contest.
I am no longer puzzled. The purpose behind the testimonial contests
is the same as the purpose behind the political essay contests of the
Chinese Communists. In both instances, the aim is to get as many people
as possible to go on record as liking the product. In Korea, the product
was a brand of Chinese communism; in the United States, it might be
a brand of cuticle remover. The type of product doesn’t matter; the

62 / Influence
process is the same. Participants voluntarily write essays for attractive
prizes that they have only a small chance to win. But they know that
for an essay to have any chance of winning at all, it must include praise
for the product. So they find praiseworthy features of the product and
describe them in their essays. The result is hundreds of men in Korea
or hundreds of thousands of people in America who testify in writing
to the product’s appeal and who, consequently, experience that “magical” pull to believe what they have written.

The Public Eye
One reason that written testaments are effective in bringing about
genuine personal change is that they can so easily be made public. The
prisoner experience in Korea showed the Chinese to be quite aware of
an important psychological principle: Public commitments tend to be
lasting commitments. The Chinese constantly arranged to have the proCommunist statements of their captives seen by others. A man who
had written a political essay the Chinese liked, for example, might find
copies of it posted around camp, or might be asked to read it to a prisoner discussion group, or even to read it on the camp radio broadcast.
As far as the Chinese were concerned, the more public the better. Why?
Whenever one takes a stand that is visible to others, there arises a
drive to maintain that stand in order to look like a consistent person.
Remember that earlier in this chapter we described how desirable good
personal consistency is as a trait; how someone without it could be
judged as fickle, uncertain, pliant, scatterbrained, or unstable; how
someone with it is viewed as rational, assured, trustworthy, and sound.
Given this context, it is hardly surprising that people try to avoid the
look of inconsistency. For appearances’ sake, then, the more public a
stand, the more reluctant we will be to change it.
An illustration of how public commitments can lead to doggedly
consistent further action is provided in a famous experiment performed
by a pair of prominent social psychologists, Morton Deutsch and Harold
Gerard. The basic procedure was to have college students first estimate
in their own minds the length of lines they were shown. At this point,
one sample of the students had to commit themselves publicly to their
initial judgments by writing them down, signing their names to them,
and turning them in to the experimenter. A second sample of students
also committed themselves to their first estimates, but they did so
privately by putting them on a Magic Writing Pad and then erasing
them by lifting the Magic Pad’s plastic cover before anyone could see
what they had written. A third set of students did not commit them-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 63
selves to their initial estimates at all; they just kept the estimates in mind
privately.
In these ways, Deutsch and Gerard had cleverly arranged for some
students to commit themselves publicly, some privately, and some not
at all to their initial decisions. What Deutsch and Gerard wanted to find
out was which of the three types of students would be most inclined
to stick with their first judgments after receiving information that those
judgments were incorrect. So all of the students were given new evidence suggesting that their initial estimates were wrong, and they were
then given the chance to change their estimates.
The results were quite clear. The students who had never written
down their first choices were the least loyal to those choices. When new
evidence was presented that questioned the wisdom of decisions that
had never left their heads, these students were the most influenced by
the new information to change what they had viewed as the “correct”
decision. Compared to these uncommitted students, those who had
merely written their decisions for a moment on a Magic Pad were significantly less willing to change their minds when given the chance.
Even though they had committed themselves under the most anonymous of circumstances, the act of writing down their first judgments
caused them to resist the influence of contradictory new data and to
remain consistent with the preliminary choices. But Deutsch and Gerard
found that, by far, it was the students who had publicly recorded their
initial positions who most resolutely refused to shift from those positions
later. Public commitment had hardened them into the most stubborn
of all.
This sort of stubbornness can occur even in situations where accuracy
should be more important than consistency. In one study, when six- or
twelve-person experimental juries were deciding a close case, hung
juries were significantly more frequent if the jurors had to express their
opinions with a visible show of hands rather than by secret ballot. Once
jurors had stated their initial views publicly, they were reluctant to allow
themselves to change publicly, either. Should you ever find yourself as
the foreperson of a jury under these conditions, then, you could reduce
the risk of a hung jury by choosing a secret rather than public balloting
technique.11
The Deutsch and Gerard finding that we are truest to our decisions
if we have bound ourselves to them publicly can be put to good use.
Consider the organizations dedicated to helping people rid themselves
of bad habits. Many weight-reduction clinics, for instance, understand
that often a person’s private decision to lose weight will be too weak
to withstand the blandishments of bakery windows, wafting cooking
scents, and late-night Sara Lee commercials. So they see to it that the

64 / Influence
decision is buttressed by the pillars of public commitment. They require
their clients to write down an immediate weight-loss goal and show that
goal to as many friends, relatives, and neighbors as possible. Clinic
operators report that frequently this simple technique works where all
else has failed.
Of course, there’s no need to pay a special clinic in order to engage
a visible commitment as an ally. One San Diego woman described to
me how she employed a public promise to help herself finally stop
smoking:
I remember it was after I heard about another scientific study
showing that smoking causes cancer. Every time one of those
things came out, I used to get determined to quit, but I never could.
This time, though, I decided I had to do something. I’m a proud
person. It matters to me if other people see me in a bad light. So I
thought, “Maybe I can use that pride to help me dump this damn
habit.” So I made a list of all the people who I really wanted to
respect me. Then I went out and got some blank business cards
and I wrote on the back of each card, “I promise you that I will
never smoke another cigarette.”
Within a week, I had given or sent a signed card to everybody on the
list—my dad, my brother back East, my boss, my best girlfriend, my
ex-husband, everybody but one—the guy I was dating then. I was just
crazy about him, and I really wanted him to value me as a person. Believe me, I thought twice about giving him a card because I knew that
if I couldn’t keep my promise to him I’d die. But one day at the office—he worked in the same building as I did—I just walked up to him,
handed him the card, and walked away without saying anything.
Quitting “cold turkey” was the hardest thing I’ve ever done. There
must have been a thousand times when I thought I had to have a smoke.
But whenever that happened, I’d just picture how all of the people on
my list, especially this one guy, would think less of me if I couldn’t stick
to my guns. And that’s all it took. I’ve never taken another puff.
You know, the interesting thing is the guy turned out to be a real
schmuck. I can’t figure out what I saw in him back then. But at the time,
without knowing it, he helped me get through the toughest part of the
toughest thing I’ve ever had to do. I don’t even like him anymore. Still,
I do feel grateful in a way because I think he saved my life.

The Effort Extra
Yet another reason that written commitments are so effective is that
they require more work than verbal ones. And the evidence is clear that

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 65
the more effort that goes into a commitment, the greater is its ability to
influence the attitudes of the person who made it. We can find that
evidence quite close to home or as far away as the back regions of the
primitive world. For example, there is a tribe in southern Africa, the
Thonga, that requires each of its boys to go through an elaborate initiation ceremony before he can be counted a man of the tribe. As with
many other primitive peoples, a Thonga boy endures a great deal before
he is admitted to adult membership in the group. Anthropologists
Whiting, Kluckhohn, and Anthony have described this three-month
ordeal in brief but vivid terms:
When a boy is somewhere between 10 and 16 years of age, he is
sent by his parents to “circumcision school,” which is held every
4 or 5 years. Here in company with his age-mates he undergoes
severe hazing by the adult males of the society. The initiation begins when each boy runs the gauntlet between two rows of men
who beat him with clubs. At the end of this experience he is
stripped of his clothes and his hair is cut. He is next met by a man
covered with lion manes and is seated upon a stone facing this
“lion man.” Someone then strikes him from behind and when he
turns his head to see who has struck him, his foreskin is seized
and in two movements cut off by the “lion man.” Afterward he is
secluded for three months in the “yard of mysteries,” where he
can be seen only by the initiated.
During the course of his initiation, the boy undergoes six major
trials: beatings, exposure to cold, thirst, eating of unsavory foods,
punishment, and the threat of death. On the slightest pretext, he
may be beaten by one of the newly initiated men, who is assigned
to the task by the older men of the tribe. He sleeps without covering and suffers bitterly from the winter cold. He is forbidden to
drink a drop of water during the whole three months. Meals are
often made nauseating by the half-digested grass from the stomach
of an antelope, which is poured over his food. If he is caught
breaking any important rule governing the ceremony, he is severely punished. For example, in one of these punishments, sticks are
placed between the fingers of the offender, then a strong man
closes his hand around that of the novice, practically crushing his
fingers. He is frightened into submission by being told that in
former times boys who had tried to escape or who had revealed
the secrets to women or to the uninitiated were hanged and their
bodies burned to ashes.12
On the face of it, these rites seem extraordinary and bizarre. Yet, at
the same time, they can be seen to be remarkably similar in principle

66 / Influence
and even in detail to the common initiation ceremonies of school fraternities. During the traditional “Hell Week” held yearly on college
campuses, fraternity pledges must persevere through a variety of
activities designed by the older members to test the limits of physical
exertion, psychological strain, and social embarrassment. At week’s
end, the boys who have persisted through the ordeal are accepted for
full group membership. Mostly their tribulations have left them no
more than greatly tired and a bit shaky, although sometimes the negative
effects are more serious.
What is interesting is how closely the particular features of Hell Week
tasks match those of the tribal initiation rites. Recall that anthropologists
identified six major trials to be endured by a Thonga initiate during his
stay in the “yard of mysteries.” A scan of newspaper reports shows
that each trial also has its place in the hazing rituals of Greek-letter societies:
• Beatings. Fourteen-year-old Michael Kalogris spent three weeks in a
Long Island hospital recovering from internal injuries suffered during
a Hell Night initiation ceremony of his high-school fraternity, Omega
Gamma Delta. He had been administered the “atomic bomb” by his
prospective brothers, who told him to hold his hands over his head
and keep them there while they gathered around to slam fists into
his stomach and back simultaneously and repeatedly.
• Exposure to cold. On a winter night, Frederick Bronner, a California
junior-college student, was taken three thousand feet up and ten
miles into the hills of a national forest by his prospective fraternity
brothers. Left to find his way home wearing only a thin sweatshirt
and slacks, Fat Freddy, as he was called, shivered in a frigid wind
until he tumbled down a steep ravine, fracturing bones and hurting
his head. Prevented by his injuries from going on, he huddled there
against the cold until he died of exposure.
• Thirst. Two Ohio State University freshmen found themselves in the
“dungeon” of their prospective fraternity house after breaking the
rule requiring all pledges to crawl into the dining area prior to Hell
Week meals. Once locked in the house storage closet, they were given
only salty foods to eat for nearly two days. Nothing was provided
for drinking purposes except a pair of plastic cups in which they
could catch their own urine.
• Eating of unsavory foods. At Kappa Sigma house on the campus of the
University of Southern California, the eyes of eleven pledges bulged
when they saw the sickening task before them. Eleven quarter-pound
slabs of raw liver lay on a tray. Cut thick and soaked in oil, each was
to be swallowed whole, one to a boy. Gagging and choking re-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 67
peatedly, young Richard Swanson failed three times to down his
piece. Determined to succeed, he finally got the oil-soaked meat into
his throat where it lodged and, despite all efforts to remove it, killed
him.
• Punishment. In Wisconsin, a pledge who forgot one section of a ritual
incantation to be memorized by all initiates was punished for his error. He was required to keep his feet under the rear legs of a folding
chair while the heaviest of his fraternity brothers sat down and drank
a beer. Although the pledge did not cry out during the punishment,
a bone in each of his feet was broken.
• Threats of death. A pledge of Zeta Beta Tau fraternity was taken to a
beach area of New Jersey and told to dig his “own grave.” Seconds
after he complied with orders to lie flat in the finished hole, the sides
collapsed, suffocating him before his prospective fraternity brothers
could dig him out.
There is another striking similarity between the initiation rites of tribal
and fraternal societies: They simply will not die. Resisting all attempts
to eliminate or suppress them, such hazing practices have been phenomenally resilient. Authorities, in the form of colonial governments or
university administrations, have tried threats, social pressures, legal
actions, banishments, bribes, and bans to persuade the groups to remove
the hazards and humiliations from their initiation ceremonies. None
has been successful. Oh, there may be a change while the authority is
watching closely. But this is usually more apparent than real, the
harsher trials occurring under more secret circumstances until the
pressure is off and they can surface again.
On some college campuses, officials have tried to eliminate dangerous
hazing practices by substituting a “Help Week” of civic service or by
taking direct control of the initiation rituals. When such attempts are
not slyly circumvented by fraternities, they are met with outright
physical resistance. For example, in the aftermath of Richard Swanson’s
choking death at USC, the university president issued new rules requiring that all pledging activities be reviewed by school authorities before
going into effect and that adult advisers be present during initiation
ceremonies. According to one national magazine, “The new ‘code’ set
off a riot so violent that city police and fire detachments were afraid to
enter campus.”
Resigning themselves to the inevitable, other college representatives
have given up on the possibility of abolishing the degradations of Hell
Week. “If hazing is a universal human activity, and every bit of evidence
points to this conclusion, you most likely won’t be able to ban it effectively. Refuse to allow it openly and it will go underground. You can’t

68 / Influence
ban sex, you can’t prohibit alcohol, and you probably can’t eliminate
hazing!”13
What is it about hazing practices that make them so precious to these
societies? What could make the groups want to evade, undermine, or
contest any effort to ban the degrading and perilous features of their
initiation rites? Some have argued that the groups themselves are
composed of psychological or social miscreants whose twisted needs
demand that others be harmed and humiliated. But the evidence does
not support such a view. Studies done on the personality traits of fraternity members, for instance, show them to be, if anything, slightly
healthier than other college students in their psychological adjustment.
Similarly, fraternities are known for their willingness to engage in beneficial community projects for the general social good. What they are
not willing to do, however, is substitute these projects for their initiation
ceremonies. One survey at the University of Washington found that,
of the fraternity chapters examined, most had a type of Help Week
tradition but that this community service was in addition to Hell Week.
In only one case was such service directly related to initiation procedures.14
The picture that emerges of the perpetrators of hazing practices is of
normal individuals who tend to be psychologically stable and socially
concerned but who become aberrantly harsh as a group at only one
time—immediately before the admission of new members to the society.
The evidence, then, points to the ceremony as the culprit. There must
be something about its rigors that is vital to the group. There must be
some function to its harshness that the group will fight relentlessly to
maintain. What?
My own view is that the answer appeared in 1959 in the results of a
study little known outside of social psychology. A pair of young researchers, Elliot Aronson and Judson Mills, decided to test their observation that “persons who go through a great deal of trouble or pain to
attain something tend to value it more highly than persons who attain
the same thing with a minimum of effort.” The real stroke of inspiration
came in their choice of the initiation ceremony as the best place to examine this possibility. They found that college women who had to endure a severely embarrassing initiation ceremony in order to gain access
to a sex discussion group convinced themselves that their new group
and its discussions were extremely valuable, even though Aronson and
Mills had previously rehearsed the other group members to be as
“worthless and uninteresting” as possible. Different coeds, who went
through a much milder initiation ceremony or went through no initiation
at all, were decidedly less positive about the “worthless” new group
they had joined. Additional research showed the same results when

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 69
coeds were required to endure pain rather than embarrassment to get
into a group. The more electric shock a woman received as part of the
initiation ceremony, the more she later persuaded herself that her new
group and its activities were interesting, intelligent, and desirable.15
Now the harassments, the exertions, even the beatings of initiation
rituals begin to make sense. The Thonga tribesman watching, with tears
in his eyes, his ten-year-old son tremble through a night on the cold
ground of the “yard of mysteries,” the college sophomore punctuating
his Hell Night paddling of his fraternity “little brother” with bursts of
nervous laughter—these are not acts of sadism. They are acts of group
survival. They function, oddly enough, to spur future society members
to find the group more attractive and worthwhile. As long as it is the
case that people like and believe in what they have struggled to get,
these groups will continue to arrange effortful and troublesome initiation
rites. The loyalty and dedication of those who emerge will increase to
a great degree the chances of group cohesiveness and survival. Indeed,
one study of fifty-four tribal cultures found that those with the most
dramatic and stringent initiation ceremonies were those with the greatest
group solidarity.16 Given Aronson and Mills’s demonstration that the
severity of an initiation ceremony significantly heightens the newcomer’s
commitment to the group, it is hardly surprising that groups will oppose
all attempts to eliminate this crucial link to their future strength.
Military groups and organizations are by no means exempt from
these same processes. The agonies of “boot camp” initiations to the
armed services are legendary. The novelist William Styron, a former
Marine, catalogs his own experiences in language we could easily apply
to the Thongas (or, for that matter, to the Kappas or Betas or Alphas):
“the remorseless close-order drill hour after hour in the burning sun,
the mental and physical abuse, the humiliations, the frequent sadism
at the hands of drill sergeants, all the claustrophobic and terrifying insults to the spirit which can make an outpost like Quantico or Parris
Island one of the closest things in the free world to a concentration
camp.” But, in his commentary, Styron does more than recount the
misery of this “training nightmare”—he recognizes its intended outcome: “There is no ex-Marine of my acquaintance, regardless of what
direction he may have taken spiritually or politically after those callow
gung-ho days, who does not view the training as a crucible out of which
he emerged in some way more resilient, simply braver and better for
the wear.”
But why should we believe William Styron, the writer, in such matters? After all, for professional storytellers, the line between truth and
fiction is often blurred. Indeed, why should we believe him when he
alleges that the “infernal” character of his military training was not only

70 / Influence
successful, it was specifically intended, intended to create desired levels
of pride and camaraderie among those who endured and survived it?
At least one reason to accept his assessment comes from unfictionalized
reality—the case of West Point cadet John Edwards, who was expelled
from the U.S. Military Academy in 1988 on charges involving the authorized hazing that all first-year cadets experience at the hands of
upperclassmen to ensure that the newcomers can withstand the rigors
of West Point training. It was not that Mr. Edwards, who ranked academically near the top of his eleven-hundred-member class, had been
unable to bear up under the ritual when he was subjected to it. Nor was
he expelled because he had been aberrantly cruel in his treatment of
the younger cadets. His offense was that he would not expose the
newcomers to what he felt was “absurd and dehumanizing” treatment.
Once again, then, it appears that, for groups concerned about creating
a lasting sense of solidarity and distinction, the hardship of demanding
initiation activities provides a valuable advantage that they will not
easily surrender—either to aspiring members who are unwilling to take
the harshness or to give it out.

The Inner Choice
Examination of such diverse activities as the indoctrination practices
of the Chinese Communists and the initiation rituals of college fraternities has provided some valuable information about commitment. It
appears that commitments are most effective in changing a person’s
self-image and future behavior when they are active, public, and effortful. But there is another property of effective commitment that is more
important than the other three combined. To understand what it is, we
first need to solve a pair of puzzles in the actions of Communist interrogators and fraternity brothers.
The first puzzle comes from the refusal of fraternity chapters to allow
public-service activities to be part of their initiation ceremonies. Recall
that one survey showed that community projects, though frequent,
were nearly always separated from the membership-induction program.
But why? If an effortful commitment is what fraternities are after in
their initiation rites, surely they could structure enough distasteful and
strenuous civic activities for their pledges; there is plenty of exertion
and unpleasantness to be had in the world of old-age-home repairs,
mental-health-center yard work, and hospital bedpan duty. Besides,
community-spirited endeavors of this sort would do much to improve
the highly unfavorable public and media image of fraternity Hell Week
rites; a survey showed that for every positive newspaper story concerning Hell Week, there were five negative stories. If only for public-rela-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 71
tions reasons, then, fraternities should want to incorporate communityservice efforts into their initiation practices. But they don’t.
To examine the second puzzle, we need to return to the Chinese
prison camps of Korea and the regular political essay contests held for
American captives. The Chinese wanted as many Americans as possible
to enter these contests so that, in the process, they might write things
favorable to the Communist view. If, however, the idea was to attract
large numbers of entrants, why were the prizes so small? A few extra
cigarettes or a little fresh fruit were often all that a contest winner could
expect. In the setting, even these prizes were valuable, but still there
were much larger rewards—warm clothing, special mail privileges,
increased freedom of movement in camp—that the Chinese could have
used to increase the number of essay writers. Yet they specifically chose
to employ the smaller rather than the larger, more motivating rewards.
Although the settings are quite different, the surveyed fraternities
refused to allow civic activities into their initiation ceremonies for the
same reason that the Chinese withheld large prizes in favor of less
powerful inducements: They wanted the men to own what they had
done. No excuses, no ways out were allowed. A man who suffered
through an arduous hazing could not be given the chance to believe he
did so for charitable purposes. A prisoner who salted his political essay
with a few anti-American comments could not be permitted to shrug
it off as motivated by a big reward. No, the fraternity chapters and
Chinese Communists were playing for keeps. It was not enough to
wring commitments out of their men; those men had to be made to take
inner responsibility for their actions.
Given the Chinese Communist government’s affinity for the politicalessay contest as a commitment device, it should come as no surprise
that a wave of such contests appeared in the aftermath of the 1989
massacre in Tiananmen Square, where pro-democracy protesters were
gunned down by government soldiers. In Beijing alone, nine state-run
newspapers and television stations sponsored essay competitions on
the “quelling of the counterrevolutionary rebellion.” Still acting in accord
with its long-standing and insightful de-emphasis of rewards for public
commitments, the Beijing government left the contest prizes unspecified.
Social scientists have determined that we accept inner responsibility
for a behavior when we think we have chosen to perform it in the absence of strong outside pressures. A large reward is one such external
pressure. It may get us to perform a certain action, but it won’t get us
to accept inner responsibility for the act. Consequently, we won’t feel
committed to it. The same is true of a strong threat; it may motivate
immediate compliance, but it is unlikely to produce long-term commitment.

72 / Influence
All this has important implications for rearing children. It suggests
that we should never heavily bribe or threaten our children to do the
things we want them truly to believe in. Such pressures will probably
produce temporary compliance with our wishes. However, if we want
more than just that, if we want the children to believe in the correctness
of what they have done, if we want them to continue to perform the
desired behavior when we are not present to apply those outside pressures, then we must somehow arrange for them to accept inner responsibility for the actions we want them to take. An experiment by Jonathan
Freedman gives us some hints about what to do and what not to do in
this regard.
Freedman wanted to see if he could prevent second- to fourth-grade
boys from playing with a fascinating toy, just because he had said that
it was wrong to do so some six weeks earlier. Anyone familiar with
seven-to-nine-year-old boys must realize the enormity of the task. But
Freedman had a plan. If he could first get the boys to convince themselves that it was wrong to play with the forbidden toy, perhaps that
belief would keep them from playing with it thereafter. The difficult
thing was making the boys believe that it was wrong to amuse themselves with the toy—an extremely expensive, battery-controlled robot.
Freedman knew it would be easy enough to have a boy obey temporarily. All he had to do was threaten the boy with severe consequences
should he be caught playing with the toy. As long as he was nearby to
deal out stiff punishment, Freedman figured that few boys would risk
operating the robot. He was right. After showing a boy an array of five
toys and warning him, “It is wrong to play with the robot. If you play
with the robot, I’ll be very angry and will have to do something about
it,” Freedman left the room for a few minutes. During that time, the
boy was observed secretly through a one-way mirror. Freedman tried
this threat procedure on twenty-two different boys, and twenty-one of
them never touched the robot while he was gone.
So a strong threat was successful while the boys thought they might
be caught and punished. But Freedman had already guessed that. He
was really interested in the effectiveness of the threat in guiding the
boys’ behavior later on, when he was no longer around. To find out
what would happen then, he sent a young woman back to the boys’
school about six weeks after he had been there. She took the boys out
of the class one at a time to participate in an experiment. Without ever
mentioning any connection with Freedman, she escorted each boy back
to the room with the five toys and gave him a drawing test. While she
was scoring the test, she told the boy that he was free to play with any
toy in the room. Of course, almost all the boys played with a toy. The
interesting result was that, of the boys playing with a toy, 77 percent

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 73
chose to play with the robot that had been forbidden to them earlier.
Freedman’s severe threat, which had been so successful six weeks before,
was almost totally unsuccessful when he was no longer able to back it
up with punishment.
But Freedman wasn’t finished yet. He changed his procedure slightly
with a second sample of boys. These boys, too, were initially shown the
array of five toys by Freedman and warned not to play with the robot
while he was briefly out of the room because “It is wrong to play with
the robot.” But this time, Freedman provided no strong threat to
frighten a boy into obedience. He simply left the room and observed
through the one-way mirror to see if his instruction against playing
with the forbidden toy was enough. It was. Just as with the other sample,
only one of the twenty-two boys touched the robot during the short
time Freedman was gone.
The real difference between the two samples of boys came six weeks
later, when they had a chance to play with the toys while Freedman
was no longer around. An astonishing thing happened with the boys
who had earlier been given no strong threat against playing with the
robot: When given the freedom to play with any toy they wished, most
avoided the robot, even though it was by far the most attractive of the
five toys available (the others were a cheap plastic submarine, a child’s
baseball glove without a ball, an unloaded toy rifle, and a toy tractor).
When these boys played with one of the five toys, only 33 percent chose
the robot.
Something dramatic had happened to both groups of boys. For the
first group, it was the severe threat they heard from Freedman to back
up his statement that playing with the robot was “wrong.” It had been
quite effective at first when Freedman could catch them should they
violate his rule. Later, though, when he was no longer present to observe
the boys’ behavior, his threat was impotent and his rule was, consequently, ignored. It seems clear that the threat had not taught the
boys that operating the robot was wrong, only that it was unwise to do
so when the possibility of punishment existed.
For the other boys, the dramatic event had come from the inside, not
the outside. Freedman had instructed them, too, that playing with the
robot was wrong, but he had added no threat of punishment should
they disobey him. There were two important results. First, Freedman’s
instruction alone was enough to prevent the boys from operating the
robot while he was briefly out of the room. Second, the boys took personal responsibility for their choice to stay away from the robot during
that time. They decided that they hadn’t played with it because they
didn’t want to. After all, there were no strong punishments associated
with the toy to explain their behavior otherwise. Thus, weeks later,

74 / Influence
when Freedman was nowhere around, they still ignored the robot because they had been changed inside to believe that they did not want
to play with it.17
Adults facing the child-rearing experience can take a cue from the
Freedman study. Suppose a couple wants to impress upon their
daughter that lying is wrong. A strong, clear threat (“It’s bad to lie,
honey; so if I catch you at it, I’ll cut your tongue out”) might well be
effective when the parents are present or when the girl thinks she can
be discovered. But it will not achieve the larger goal of convincing her
that she does not want to lie because she thinks it’s wrong. To do that,
a much subtler approach is required. A reason must be given that is
just strong enough to get her to be truthful most of the time but is not
so strong that she sees it as the obvious reason for her truthfulness. It’s
a tricky business, because exactly what this barely sufficient reason will
be changes from child to child. For one little girl, a simple appeal may
be enough (“It’s bad to lie, honey; so I hope you won’t do it”); for another child, it may be necessary to add a somewhat stronger reason
(“…because if you do, I’ll be disappointed in you”); for a third child, a
mild form of warning may be required as well (“…and I’ll probably
have to do something I don’t want to do”). Wise parents will know
which kind of reason will work on their own children. The important
thing is to use a reason that will initially produce the desired behavior
and will, at the same time, allow a child to take personal responsibility
for that behavior. Thus, the less detectable outside pressure such a
reason contains, the better. Selecting just the right reason is not an easy
task for parents. But the effort should pay off. It is likely to mean the
difference between short-lived compliance and long-term commitment.
For a pair of reasons we have already talked about, compliance professionals love commitments that produce inner change. First, that
change is not just specific to the situation where it first occurred; it
covers a whole range of related situations, too. Second, the effects of
the change are lasting. So, once a man has been induced to take action
that shifts his self-image to that of, let’s say, a public-spirited citizen,
he is likely to be public-spirited in a variety of other circumstances
where his compliance may also be desired, and he is likely to continue
his public-spirited behavior for as long as his new self-image holds.
There is yet another attraction in commitments that lead to inner
change—they grow their own legs. There is no need for the compliance
professional to undertake a costly and continuing effort to reinforce the
change; the pressure for consistency will take care of all that. After our
friend comes to view himself as a public-spirited citizen, he will automatically begin to see things differently. He will convince himself that

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 75
it is the correct way to be. He will begin to pay attention to facts he
hadn’t noticed before about the value of community service. He will
make himself available to hear arguments he hadn’t heard before favoring civic action. And he will find such arguments more persuasive than
before. In general, because of the need to be consistent within his system
of beliefs, he will assure himself that his choice to take public-spirited
action was right. What is important about this process of generating
additional reasons to justify the commitment is that the reasons are new.
Thus, even if the original reason for the civic-minded behavior was
taken away, these newly discovered reasons might be enough by
themselves to support his perception that he had behaved correctly.
The advantage to an unscrupulous compliance professional is tremendous. Because we build new struts to undergird choices we have
committed ourselves to, an exploitative individual can offer us an inducement for making such a choice, and after the decision has been
made, can remove that inducement, knowing that our decision will
probably stand on its own newly created legs. New-car dealers frequently try to benefit from this process through a trick they call
“throwing a lowball.” I first encountered the tactic while posing as a
sales trainee at a local Chevrolet dealership. After a week of basic instruction, I was allowed to watch the regular salesmen perform. One
practice that caught my attention right away was the lowball.
For certain customers, a very good price is offered on a car, perhaps
as much as four hundred dollars below competitors’ prices. The good
deal, however, is not genuine; the dealer never intends it to go through.
Its only purpose is to cause a prospect to decide to buy one of the dealership’s cars. Once the decision is made, a number of activities develop
the customer’s sense of personal commitment to the car—a raft of purchase forms are filled out, extensive financing terms are arranged,
sometimes the customer is encouraged to drive the car for a day before
signing the contract “so you can get the feel of it and show it around
in the neighborhood and at work.” During this time, the dealer knows,
customers automatically develop a range of new reasons to support the
choice they have now made.
Then something happens. Occasionally an “error” in the calculations
is discovered—maybe the salesman forgot to add in the cost of the air
conditioner, and if the buyer still requires air conditioning, four hundred
dollars must be added to the price. To keep from being suspected of
gouging by the customer, some dealers let the bank handling the financing find the mistake. At other times, the deal is disallowed at the last
moment when the salesman checks with his boss, who cancels it because
“We’d be losing money.” For only another four hundred dollars the
car can be had, which, in the context of a multithousand-dollar deal,

76 / Influence
doesn’t seem too steep since, as the salesman emphasizes, the cost is
equal to competitors’ and “This is the car you chose, right?” Another,
even more insidious form of lowballing occurs when the salesman
makes an inflated trade-in offer on the prospect’s old car as part of the
buy/trade package. The customer recognizes the offer as overly generous and jumps at the deal. Later, before the contract is signed, the usedcar manager says that the salesman’s estimate was four hundred dollars
too high and reduces the trade-in allowance to its actual, blue-book
level. The customer, realizing that the reduced offer is the fair one, accepts it as appropriate and sometimes feels guilty about trying to take
advantage of the salesman’s high estimate. I once witnessed a woman
provide an embarrassed apology to a salesman who had used the last
version of lowballing on her—this while she was signing a new-car
contract giving him a huge commission. He looked hurt but managed
a forgiving smile.
No matter which variety of lowballing is used, the sequence is the
same: An advantage is offered that induces a favorable purchase decision; then, sometime after the decision has been made but before the
bargain is sealed, the original purchase advantage is deftly removed.
It seems almost incredible that a customer would buy a car under these
circumstances. Yet it works—not on everybody, of course, but it is effective enough to be a staple compliance procedure in many, many car
showrooms. Automobile dealers have come to understand the ability
of a personal commitment to build its own support system, a support
system of new justifications for the commitment. Often these justifications provide so many strong legs for the decision to stand on that when
the dealer pulls away only one leg, the original one, there is no collapse.
The loss can be shrugged off by the customer who is consoled, even
made happy, by the array of other good reasons favoring the choice. It
never occurs to the buyer that those additional reasons might never
have existed had the choice not been made in the first place.18
The impressive thing about the lowball tactic is its ability to make a
person feel pleased with a poor choice. Those who have only poor
choices to offer us, then, are especially fond of the technique. We can
find them throwing lowballs in business, social, and personal situations.
For instance, there’s my neighbor Tim, a true lowball aficionado. Recall
that he’s the one who, by promising to change his ways, got his girlfriend, Sara, to cancel her impending marriage to another and to take
him back. Since her decision for Tim, Sara has become more devoted
to him than ever, even though he has not fulfilled his promises. She
explains this by saying that she has allowed herself to see all sorts of
positive qualities in Tim she had never recognized before.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 77
I know full well that Sara is a lowball victim. Just as sure as I had
watched buyers fall for the give-it-and-take-it-away-later strategy in
the car showroom, I watched her fall for the same trick with Tim. For
his part, Tim remains the guy he has always been. But because the new
attractions Sara has discovered (or created) in him are quite real for her,
she now seems satisfied with the same arrangement that was unacceptable before her enormous commitment. The decision to choose Tim,
poor as it may have been objectively, has grown its own supports and
appears to have made Sara genuinely happy. I have never mentioned
to Sara what I know about lowballing. The reason for my silence is not
that I think her better off in the dark on the issue. As a general guiding
principle, more information is always better than less information. It’s
just that, if I said a word, I am confident she would hate me for it.
Depending on the motives of the person wishing to use them, any of
the compliance techniques discussed in this book can be employed for
good or for ill. It should not be surprising, then, that the lowball tactic
can be used for more socially beneficial purposes than selling new cars
or reestablishing relationships with former lovers. One research project
done in Iowa, for example, shows how the lowball procedure can influence homeowners to conserve energy.19 The project, headed by Dr.
Michael Pallak, began at the start of the Iowa winter when residents
who heated their homes with natural gas were contacted by an interviewer. The interviewer gave them some energy-conservation tips and
asked them to try to save fuel in the future. Although they all agreed
to try, when the researchers examined the utility records of these families after a month and again at winter’s end, it was clear that no real
savings had occurred. The residents who had promised to make a
conservation attempt used just as much natural gas as a random sample
of their neighbors who had not been contacted by an interviewer. Just
good intentions coupled with information about saving fuel, then, were
not enough to change habits.
Even before the project began, Pallak and his research team had recognized that something more would be needed to shift long-standing
energy patterns. So they tried a slightly different procedure on a comparable sample of Iowa natural-gas users. These people, too, were
contacted by an interviewer, who provided energy-saving hints and
asked them to conserve. But for these families, the interviewer offered
something else: Those residents agreeing to save energy would have
their names publicized in newspaper articles as public-spirited, fuelconserving citizens. The effect was immediate. One month later, when
the utility companies checked their meters, the homeowners in this
sample had saved an average of 422 cubic feet of natural gas apiece.

78 / Influence
The chance to have their names in the paper had motivated these residents to substantial conservation efforts for a period of a month.
Then the rug was pulled out. The researchers extracted the reason
that had initially caused these people to save fuel. Each family that had
been promised publicity received a letter saying it would not be possible
to publicize their names after all.
At the end of the winter, the research team examined the effect that
letter had had on the natural-gas usage of the families. Did they return
to their old, wasteful habits when the chance to be in the newspaper
was removed? Hardly. For each of the remaining winter months, they
actually conserved more fuel than they had during the time they thought
they would be publicly celebrated for it! In terms of percentage of energy
savings, they had managed a 12.2 percent first-month gas savings because they expected to see themselves lauded in the paper. But after
the letter arrived informing them to the contrary, they did not return
to their previous energy-use levels; instead, they increased their savings
to a 15.5 percent level for the rest of the winter.
Although we can never be completely sure of such things, one explanation for their persistent behavior presents itself immediately. These
people had been lowballed into a conservation commitment through a
promise of newspaper publicity. Once made, that commitment started
generating its own support: The homeowners began acquiring new
energy habits, began feeling good about their public-spirited efforts,
began convincing themselves of the vital need to reduce American dependence on foreign fuel, began appreciating the monetary savings in
their utility bills, began feeling proud of their capacity for self-denial,
and, most important, began viewing themselves as conservationminded. With all these new reasons present to justify the commitment
to use less energy, it is no wonder that the commitment remained firm
even after the original reason, newspaper publicity, had been kicked
away.
But strangely enough, when the publicity factor was no longer a
possibility, these families did not merely maintain their fuel-saving effort, they heightened it. Any of a number of interpretations could be
offered for that still stronger effort, but I have a favorite. In a way, the
opportunity to receive newspaper publicity had prevented the
homeowners from fully owning their commitment to conservation. Of
all the reasons supporting the decision to try to save fuel, it was the
only one that had come from the outside; it was the only one preventing
the homeowners from thinking that they were conserving gas because
they believed in it. So when the letter arrived canceling the publicity
agreement, it removed the only impediment to these residents’ images
of themselves as fully concerned, energy-conscious citizens. This un-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 79
qualified, new self-image then pushed them to even greater heights of
conservation. Whether or not such an explanation is correct, a repeat
study done by Pallak indicates that this hidden benefit of the lowball
tactic is no fluke.
The experiment was done in summer on Iowans whose homes were
cooled by central air-conditioning. Those homeowners who were
promised newspaper publicity decreased their electricity use by 27.8
percent during July, as compared to similar homeowners who were not
promised any coverage or who were not contacted at all. At the end of
July, a letter was sent canceling the publicity promise. Rather than reverting to their old habits, the lowballed residents increased their August
energy savings to a stunning 41.6 percent. Much like Sara, they appeared
to have become committed to a choice through an initial inducement
and were still more dedicated to it after the inducement had been removed.

HOW TO SAY NO
“Consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds.” Or, at least, so goes a
frequently heard quotation attributed to Ralph Waldo Emerson. But
what a very odd thing to say. Looking around, it is obvious that, quite
contrary to what Emerson seems to have suggested, internal consistency
is a hallmark of logic and intellectual strength, while its lack characterizes the intellectually scattered and limited among us. What, then, could
a thinker of Emerson’s caliber have meant when he assigned the trait
of consistency to the small-minded? I was sufficiently intrigued to go
back to the original source of his statement, the essay “Self-Reliance,”
where it was clear that the problem lay not in Emerson, but in the
popular version of what he had said. Actually he wrote, “A foolish
consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds.” For some obscure reason,
a central distinction had been lost as the years eroded the accurate
version of his statement to mean something entirely different and, upon
close inspection, entirely silly.20
That distinction should not be lost on us, however, because it is vital
to the only effective defense I know against the weapons of influence
embodied in the combined principles of commitment and consistency.
Although consistency is generally good, even vital, there is a foolish,
rigid variety to be shunned. It is this tendency to be automatically and
unthinkingly consistent that Emerson referred to. And it is this tendency
that we must be wary of, for it lays us open to the maneuvers of those
who want to exploit the mechanical commitment
consistency sequence for profit.
But since automatic consistency is so useful in allowing us an econom-

80 / Influence
ical and appropriate way of behaving most of the time, we can’t decide
merely to eliminate it from our lives altogether. The results would be
disastrous. If, rather than whirring along in accordance with our prior
decisions and deeds, we stopped to think through the merits of every
new action before performing it, we would never have time to accomplish anything significant. We need even that dangerous, mechanical
brand of consistency. The only way out of the dilemma is to know when
such consistency is likely to lead to a poor choice. There are certain
signals—two separate kinds of signals, in fact—to tip us off. We register
each type in a different part of our bodies.
The first sort of signal is easy to recognize. It occurs right in the pit
of our stomachs when we realize we are trapped into complying with
a request we know we don’t want to perform. It has happened to me a
hundred times. An especially memorable instance, though, took place
on a summer evening well before I began to study compliance tactics.
I answered my doorbell to find a stunning young woman dressed in
shorts and a revealing halter top. I noticed, nonetheless, that she was
carrying a clipboard and was asking me to participate in a survey.
Wanting to make a favorable impression, I agreed and, I do admit,
stretched the truth in my interview answers so as to present myself in
the most positive light. Our conversation went as follows:
STUNNING YOUNG WOMAN: Hello, I’m doing a survey on the entertainment habits of city residents, and I wonder if you could answer a few
questions for me.
CIALDINI: Do come in.
SYW: Thank you. I’ll just sit right here and begin. How many times per
week would you say that you go out to dinner?
C: Oh, probably three, maybe four times a week. Whenever I can, really;

I love fine restaurants.

SYW: How nice. And do you usually order wine with your dinner?
C: Only if it’s imported.
SYW: I see. What about movies? Do you go to the movies much?
C: The cinema? I can’t get enough of good films. I especially like the

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 81
sophisticated kind with the words on the bottom of the screen. How
about you? Do you like to see films?
SYW: Uh…yes, I do. But let’s get back to the interview. Do you go to
many concerts?
C: Definitely. The symphonic stuff mostly, of course; but I do enjoy a

quality pop group as well.

SYW (writing rapidly): Great! Just one more question. What about touring
performances by theatrical or ballet companies? Do you see them when
they’re in town?
C: Ah, the ballet—the movement, the grace, the form—I love it. Mark

me down as loving the ballet. See it every chance I get.

SYW: Fine. Just let me recheck my figures here for a moment, Mr.
Cialdini.
C: Actually, it’s Dr. Cialdini. But that sounds so formal; why don’t you

call me Bob?

SYW: All right, Bob. From the information you’ve already given me, I’m
pleased to say that you could save up to twelve hundred dollars a year
by joining Clubamerica! A small membership fee entitles you to discounts on most of the activities you’ve mentioned. Surely someone as
socially vigorous as yourself would want to take advantage of the tremendous savings our company can offer on all the things you’ve already
told me you do.
C (trapped like a rat): Well…uh…I…uh…I guess so.

I remember quite well feeling my stomach tighten as I stammered
my agreement. It was a clear call to my brain, “Hey, you’re being taken
here!” But I couldn’t see a way out. I had been cornered by my own
words. To decline her offer at that point would have meant facing a
pair of distasteful alternatives: If I tried to back out by protesting that
I was not actually the man-about-town I had claimed to be during the
interview, I would come off a liar; but trying to refuse without that
protest would make me come off a fool for not wanting to save twelve
hundred dollars. So I bought the entertainment package, even though

82 / Influence
I knew I had been set up so that the need to be consistent with what I
had already said would snare me.
No more, though. I listen to my stomach these days. And I have discovered a way to handle people who try to use the consistency principle
on me. I just tell them exactly what they are doing. It works beautifully.
Most of the time, they don’t understand me; they just become sufficiently
confused to want to leave me alone. I think they suspect lunacy in
anyone who responds to their requests by explaining what Ralph Waldo
Emerson meant in distinguishing between consistency and foolish
consistency. Usually they have already begun edging away by the time
I have mentioned “hobgoblins of the mind” and are gone long before
I have described the click, whirr character of commitment and consistency. Occasionally, though, they realize that I am on to their game. I
always know when that happens—it’s as clear as the egg on their faces.
They invariably become flustered, bumble through a hasty exit line,
and go for the door.
This tactic has become the perfect counterattack for me. Whenever
my stomach tells me I would be a sucker to comply with a request
merely because doing so would be consistent with some prior commitment I was tricked into, I relay that message to the requester. I don’t
try to deny the importance of consistency; I just point out the absurdity
of foolish consistency. Whether, in response, the requester shrinks away
guiltily or retreats in bewilderment, I am content. I have won; an exploiter has lost.
I sometimes think about how it would be if that stunning young
woman of years ago were to try to sell me an entertainment-club
membership now. I have it all worked out. The entire interaction would
be the same, except for the end:
SYW:…Surely someone as socially vigorous as yourself would want to
take advantage of the tremendous savings our company can offer on
all the things you’ve already told me you do.
C (with great self-assurance): Quite wrong. You see, I recognize what has

gone on here. I know that your story about doing a survey was just a
pretext for getting people to tell you how often they go out and that,
under those circumstances, there is a natural tendency to exaggerate. I
also realize that your bosses selected you for this job because of your
physical attractiveness and told you to wear clothes showing a lot of
your resilient body tissue because a pretty, scantily clad woman is likely
to get men to brag about what swingers they are in order to impress
her. So I’m not interested in your entertainment club because of what
Emerson said about foolish consistency and hobgoblins of the mind.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 83
SYW (staring blankly): Huh?
C: Look. What I told you during your fake survey doesn’t matter. I refuse

to allow myself to be locked into a mechanical sequence of commitment
and consistency when I know it’s wrongheaded. No click, whirr for me.

SYW: Huh?
C: Okay, let me put it this way: (1) It would be stupid of me to spend

money on something I don’t want. (2) I have it on excellent author-ity,
direct from my stomach, that I don’t want your entertainment plan. (3)
Therefore, if you still believe that I will buy it, you probably also still
believe in the Tooth Fairy. Surely, someone as intelligent as yourself
would be able to understand that.

SYW (trapped like a stunning young rat): Well…uh…I…uh…I guess so.

Stomachs are not especially perceptive or subtle organs. Only when
it is obvious that we are about to be conned are they likely to register
and transmit that message. At other times, when it is not clear that we
are being taken, our stomachs may never catch on. Under those circumstances we have to look elsewhere for a clue. The situation of my
neighbor Sara provides a good illustration. She made an important
commitment to Tim by canceling her prior marriage plans. That commitment has grown its own supports, so that even though the original
reasons for the commitment are gone, she remains in harmony with it.
She has convinced herself with newly formed reasons that she did the
right thing, so she stays with Tim. It is not difficult to see why there
would be no tightening in Sara’s stomach as a result. Stomachs tell us
when we are doing something we think is wrong for us. Sara thinks no
such thing. To her mind, she has chosen correctly and is behaving
consistently with that choice.
Yet, unless I badly miss my guess, there is a part of Sara that recognizes her choice as a mistake and her current living arrangement as a
brand of foolish consistency. Where, exactly, that part of Sara is located
we can’t be sure. But our language does give it a name: heart of hearts.
It is, by definition, the one place where we cannot fool ourselves. It is
the place where none of our justifications, none of our rationalizations
penetrate. Sara has the truth there, although, right now, she can’t hear
its signal clearly through the noise and static of the new support apparatus she has erected.
If Sara has erred in her choice of Tim, how long could she go without

84 / Influence
clearly recognizing it, without having a massive heart of hearts attack?
There is no telling. One thing is certain, however: As time passes, the
various alternatives to Tim are disappearing. She had better determine
soon whether she is making a mistake.
Easier said than done, of course. She must answer an extremely intricate question: “Knowing what I now know, if I could go back in time,
would I make the same choice?” The problem lies in the “Knowing
what I now know” part of the question. Just what does she now know,
accurately, about Tim? How much of what she thinks of him is the
result of a desperate attempt to justify the commitment she made? She
claims that since her decision to take him back, he cares for her more,
is trying hard to stop his excessive drinking, has learned to make a
wonderful omelet, etc. Having tasted a couple of his omelets, I have
my doubts. The important issue, though, is whether she believes these
things, not just intellectually—we can play such mind games on
ourselves—but in her heart of hearts.
There may be a little device Sara can use to find out how much of her
current satisfaction with Tim is real and how much is foolish consistency. Accumulating psychological evidence indicates that we experience
our feelings toward something a split second before we can intellectualize about it.21 My suspicion is that the message sent by the heart of
hearts is a pure, basic feeling. Therefore, if we train ourselves to be attentive, we should register it ever so slightly before our cognitive apparatus engages. According to this approach, were Sara to ask herself the
crucial “Would I make the same choice again?” question, she would be
well advised to look for and trust the first flash of feeling she experienced in response. It would likely be the signal from her heart of hearts,
slipping through undistorted just before the means by which she could
kid herself flooded in.22
I have begun using the same device myself whenever I even suspect
I might be acting in a foolishly consistent manner. One time, for instance,
I had stopped at the self-service pump of a filling station advertising a
price per gallon a couple of cents below the rate of other stations in the
area. But with pump nozzle in hand, I noticed that the price listed on
the pump was two cents higher than the display sign price. When I
mentioned the difference to a passing attendant, who I later learned
was the owner, he mumbled uncon-vincingly that the rates had changed
a few days ago but there hadn’t been time to correct the display. I tried
to decide what to do. Some reasons for staying came to mind—“I really
do need gasoline badly.” “This pump is available, and I am in sort of
a hurry.” “I think I remember that my car runs better on this brand of
gas.”
I needed to determine whether those reasons were genuine or mere

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 85
justifications for my decision to stop there. So I asked myself the crucial
question, “Knowing what I know about the real price of this gasoline,
if I could go back in time, would I make the same choice again?” Concentrating on the first burst of impression I sensed, the answer was
clear and unqualified. I would have driven right past. I wouldn’t even
have slowed down. I knew then that without the price advantage, those
other reasons would not have brought me there. They hadn’t created
the decision; the decision had created them.
That settled, there was another decision to be faced, though. Since I
was already there holding the hose, wouldn’t it be better to use it than
to suffer the inconvenience of going elsewhere to pay the same price?
Fortunately, the station attendant-owner came over and helped me
make up my mind. He asked why I wasn’t pumping any gas. I told him
I didn’t like the price discrepancy, and he said with a snarl, “Listen,
nobody’s gonna tell me how to run my business. If you think I’m
cheating you, just put that hose down right now and get off my property
as fast as you can do it, bud.” Already certain he was a cheat, I was
happy to act consistently with my belief and his wishes. I dropped the
hose on the spot…and drove over it on my way to the closest exit.
Sometimes consistency can be a marvelously rewarding thing.
READER’S REPORT

From a Woman Living in Portland, Oregon
“I was walking through downtown Portland on my way to a lunch
appointment when a young, attractive man stopped me with a friendly
smile and a powerful line: ‘Excuse me, I’m involved in a contest and I
need a good-looking woman like yourself to help me win.’ I was truly
skeptical, since I know there are many more attractive women than
myself running around; however, I was caught off guard and was
curious to find out what he wanted. He explained that he would receive
points for a contest by getting total strangers to give him a kiss. Now I
consider myself a fairly level-headed person who shouldn’t have believed his line, but he was quite persistent, and since I was almost late
for my lunch appointment, I thought, ‘What the heck, I’ll give the guy
a kiss and get out of here.’ So I did something totally against my common sense and pecked this total stranger on the cheek in the middle of
downtown Portland!
“I thought that would be the end of it, but I soon learned that it was
just the beginning. Much to my distress, he followed the kiss with the
line ‘You are a great kisser, but the real contest I am involved in is to
sell magazine subscriptions. You must be an active person. Would any
of these magazines interest you?’ At this point I should have slugged

86 / Influence
the guy and walked away; but somehow, because I had complied with
his initial request, I felt a need to be consistent, and I complied with his
second request. Yes, much to my own disbelief, I actually subscribed
to SKI magazine (which I occasionally enjoy reading, but had no intention of subscribing to), gave him a five-dollar initial-subscription fee
and left as quickly as possible, feeling quite frustrated with what I had
just done and not understanding why I had done it.
“Although it still pains me to think about it, in reflecting on the incident after reading your book, I’ve now figured out what happened. The
reason this tactic worked so effectively is because once small commitments have been made (in this case, giving a kiss), people tend to add
justifications to support the commitment and then are willing to commit
themselves further. In this situation, I justified complying with the
second request because it was consistent with my initial action. If I had
only listened to my ‘stomach signs,’ I could have saved myself a lot of
humiliation.”
By extracting a kiss, the salesman exploited the consistency principle
in two ways. First, by the time he asked for her aid in the magazine
contest, his prospect had already gone on record—with that kiss—as
agreeing to help him win a contest. Second, it seems only natural (i.e.,
congruent) that if a woman feels positively enough toward a man to
kiss him, she should feel positively toward helping him out.

Chapter 4
SOCIAL PROOF
Truths Are Us
Where all think alike, no one thinks very much.
—WALTER LIPPMANN

, when
I I surveyed the people who came into my office one day—several
DON’T KNOW ANYONE WHO LIKES CANNED LAUGHTER. IN FACT

students, two telephone repairmen, a number of university professors,
and the janitor—the reaction was invariably critical. Television, with
its incessant system of laugh tracks and technically augmented mirth,
received the most heat. The people I questioned hated canned laughter.
They called it stupid, phony, and obvious. Although my sample was
small, I would bet that it closely reflects the negative feelings of most
of the American public toward laugh tracks.
Why, then, is canned laughter so popular with television executives?
They have won their exalted positions and splendid salaries by knowing
how to give the public what it wants. Yet they religiously employ the
laugh tracks that their audiences find distasteful. And they do so over
the objections of many of their most talented artists. It is not uncommon
for acclaimed directors, writers, or actors to demand the elimination of
canned responses from the television projects they undertake. These
demands are only sometimes successful, and when they are, it is not
without a battle.
What could it be about canned laughter that is so attractive to television executives? Why would these shrewd and tested businessmen
champion a practice that their potential watchers find disagreeable and
their most creative talents find personally insulting? The answer is at

88 / Influence
once simple and intriguing: They know what the research says. Experiments have found that the use of canned merriment causes an audience
to laugh longer and more often when humorous material is presented
and to rate the material as funnier. In addition, some evidence indicates
that canned laughter is most effective for poor jokes.1
In the light of these data, the actions of television executives make
perfect sense. The introduction of laugh tracks into their comic programming will increase the humorous and appreciative responses of an
audience, even—and especially—when the material is of poor quality.
Is it any surprise, then, that television, glutted as it is with artless situation-comedy attempts, should be saturated with canned laughter?
Those executives know precisely what they are doing.
But with the mystery of the widespread use of laugh tracks solved,
we are left with a more perplexing question: Why does canned laughter
work on us the way it does? It is no longer the television executives
who appear peculiar; they are acting logically and in their own interests.
Instead, it is the behavior of the audience, of you and me, that seems
strange. Why should we laugh more at comedy material afloat in a sea
of mechanically fabricated merriment? And why should we think that
comic flotsam funnier? The executives aren’t really fooling us. Anyone
can recognize dubbed laughter. It is so blatant, so clearly counterfeit,
that there could be no confusing it with the real thing. We know full
well that the hilarity we hear is irrelevant to the humorous quality of
the joke it follows, that it is created not spontaneously by a genuine
audience, but artificially by a technician at a control board. Yet, transparent forgery that it is, it works on us!
To discover why canned laughter is so effective, we first need to understand the nature of yet another potent weapon of influence: the
principle of social proof. It states that one means we use to determine
what is correct is to find out what other people think is correct. The
principle applies especially to the way we decide what constitutes correct behavior. We view a behavior as more correct in a given situation
to the degree that we see others performing it. Whether the question is
what to do with an empty popcorn box in a movie theater, how fast to
drive on a certain stretch of highway, or how to eat the chicken at a
dinner party, the actions of those around us will be important in defining
the answer.
The tendency to see an action as more appropriate when others are
doing it normally works quite well. As a rule, we will make fewer
mistakes by acting in accord with social evidence than contrary to it.
Usually, when a lot of people are doing something, it is the right thing
to do. This feature of the principle of social proof is simultaneously its

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 89
major strength and its major weakness. Like the other weapons of influence, it provides a convenient shortcut for determining how to behave
but, at the same time, makes one who uses the shortcut vulnerable to
the attacks of profiteers who lie in wait along its path.
In the case of canned laughter, the problem comes when we begin
responding to social proof in such a mindless and reflexive fashion that
we can be fooled by partial or fake evidence. Our folly is not that we
use others’ laughter to help decide what is humorous and when mirth
is appropriate; that is in keeping with the well-founded principle of
social proof. The folly is that we do so in response to patently fraudulent
laughter. Somehow, one disembodied feature of humor—a
sound—works like the essence of humor. The example from Chapter
1 of the turkey and the polecat is instructive here. Remember that because the particular “cheep-cheep” of turkey chicks is normally associated with newborn turkeys, their mothers will display or withhold
maternal care solely on the basis of that sound? And remember how,
consequently, it was possible to trick a female turkey into mothering a
stuffed polecat as long as the replica played the recorded “cheep-cheep”
of a baby turkey? The simulated chick sound was enough to start the
female’s mothering tape whirring.
The lesson of the turkey and the polecat illustrates uncomfortably
well the relationship between the average viewer and the laugh-trackplaying television executive. We have become so accustomed to taking
the humorous reactions of others as evidence of what deserves laughter
that we, too, can be made to respond to the sound and not to the substance of the real thing. Much as a “cheep-cheep” noise removed from
the reality of a chick can stimulate a female turkey to mother, so can a
recorded “ha-ha” removed from the reality of a genuine audience
stimulate us to laugh. The television executives are exploiting our
preference for shortcuts, our tendency to react automatically on the
basis of partial evidence. They know that their tapes will cue our tapes.
Click, whirr.
Television executives are hardly alone in their use of social evidence
for profit. Our tendency to assume that an action is more correct if
others are doing it is exploited in a variety of settings. Bartenders often
“salt” their tip jars with a few dollar bills at the beginning of the evening
to simulate tips left by prior customers and thereby to give the impression that tipping with folding money is proper barroom behavior.
Church ushers sometimes salt collection baskets for the same reason
and with the same positive effect on proceeds. Evangelical preachers
are known to seed their audience with “ringers,” who are rehearsed to
come forward at a specified time to give witness and donations. For

90 / Influence
example, an Arizona State University research team that infiltrated the
Billy Graham organization reported on such advance preparations
prior to one of his Crusade visits. “By the time Graham arrives in town
and makes his altar call, an army of six thousand wait with instructions
on when to come forth at varying intervals to create the impression of
a spontaneous mass outpouring.”2
Advertisers love to inform us when a product is the “fastest-growing”
or “largest-selling” because they don’t have to convince us directly that
the product is good, they need only say that many others think so,
which seems proof enough. The producers of charity telethons devote
inordinate amounts of time to the incessant listing of viewers who have
already pledged contributions. The message being communicated to
the holdouts is clear: “Look at all the people who have decided to give.
It must be the correct thing to do.” At the height of the disco craze, certain discotheque owners manufactured a brand of visible social proof
for their clubs’ quality by creating long waiting lines outside when there
was plenty of room inside. Salesmen are taught to spice their pitches
with numerous accounts of individuals who have purchased the
product. Sales and motivation consultant Cavett Robert captures the
principle nicely in his advice to sales trainees: “Since 95 percent of the
people are imitators and only 5 percent initiators, people are persuaded
more by the actions of others than by any proof we can offer.”
Researchers, too, have employed procedures based on the principle
of social proof—sometimes with astounding results. One psychologist
in particular, Albert Bandura, has led the way in developing such procedures for the elimination of undesirable behavior. Bandura and his
colleagues have shown how people suffering from phobias can be rid
of these extreme fears in an amazingly simple fashion. For instance, in
an early study nursery-school-age children chosen because they were
terrified of dogs merely watched a little boy playing happily with a dog
for twenty minutes a day. This exhibition produced such marked
changes in the reactions of the fearful children that after only four days,
67 percent of them were willing to climb into a playpen with a dog and
remain confined there, petting and scratching it while everyone else
left the room. Moreover, when the researchers tested the children’s fear
levels again one month later, they found that the improvement had not
evaporated during that time; in fact, the children were more willing
than ever to interact with dogs.
An important practical discovery was made in a second study of
children who were exceptionally afraid of dogs: To reduce their fears,
it was not necessary to provide live demonstrations of another child
playing with a dog; film clips had the same effect. And the most effective
type of clips were those depicting not one but a variety of other children

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 91
interacting with their dogs; apparently the principle of social proof
works best when the proof is provided by the actions of a lot of other
people.3
The powerful influence of filmed examples in changing the behavior
of children can be used as therapy for various problems. Some striking
evidence is available in the research of psychologist Robert O’Connor
on socially withdrawn preschool children. We have all seen children
of this sort, terribly shy, standing alone at the fringes of the games and
groupings of their peers. O’Connor worried that a long-term pattern
of isolation was forming, even at an early age, that would create persistent difficulties in social comfort and adjustment through adulthood. In
an attempt to reverse the pattern, O’Connor made a film containing
eleven different scenes in a nursery-school setting. Each scene began
by showing a different solitary child watching some ongoing social
activity and then actively joining the activity, to everyone’s enjoyment.
O’Connor selected a group of the most severely withdrawn children
from four preschools and showed them his film. The impact was impressive. The isolates immediately began to interact with their peers at
a level equal to that of the normal children in the schools. Even more
astonishing was what O’Connor found when he returned to observe
six weeks later. While the withdrawn children who had not seen
O’Connor’s film remained as isolated as ever, those who had viewed it
were now leading their schools in amount of social activity. It seems
that this twenty-three-minute movie, viewed just once, was enough to
reverse a potential pattern of lifelong maladaptive behavior. Such is
the potency of the principle of social proof.4
When it comes to illustrations of the strength of social proof, there is
one that is far and away my favorite. Several features account for its
appeal: It offers a superb example of the much underused method of
participant observation, in which a scientist studies a process by becoming immersed in its natural occurrence; it provides information of interest to such diverse groups as historians, psychologists, and theologians; and, most important, it shows how social evidence can be used
on us—not by others, but by ourselves—to assure us that what we
prefer to be true will seem to be true.
The story is an old one, requiring an examination of ancient data, for
the past is dotted with millennial religious movements. Various sects
and cults have prophesied that on one or another particular date there
would arrive a period of redemption and great happiness for those who
believed in the group’s teachings. In each instance it has been predicted
that the beginning of the time of salvation would be marked by an important and undeniable event, usually the cataclysmic end of the world.

92 / Influence
Of course, these predictions have invariably proved false. To the acute
dismay of the members of such groups, the end has never appeared as
scheduled.
But immediately following the obvious failure of the prophecy, history
records an enigmatic pattern. Rather than disbanding in disillusion, the
cultists often become strengthened in their convictions. Risking the ridicule of the populace, they take to the streets, publicly asserting their
dogma and seeking converts with a fervor that is intensified, not diminished, by the clear disconfirmation of a central belief. So it was with the
Montanists of second-century Turkey, with the Anabaptists of sixteenthcentury Holland, with the Sabbataists of seventeenth-century Izmir,
with the Millerites of nineteenth-century America. And, thought a trio
of interested social scientists, so it might be with a doomsday cult based
in modern-day Chicago. The scientists—Leon Festinger, Henry Riecken,
and Stanley Schachter—who were then colleagues at the University of
Minnesota, heard about the Chicago group and felt it worthy of close
study. Their decision to investigate by joining the group, incognito, as
new believers and by placing additional paid observers among its ranks
resulted in a remarkably rich firsthand account of the goings-on before
and after the day of predicted catastrophe.5
The cult of believers was small, never numbering more than thirty
members. Its leaders were a middle-aged man and woman, whom the
researchers renamed, for purposes of publication, Dr. Thomas Armstrong and Mrs. Marian Keech. Dr. Armstrong, a physician on the staff
of a college student health service, had a long-held interest in mysticism,
the occult, and flying saucers; as such he served as a respected authority
on these subjects for the group. Mrs. Keech, though, was the center of
attention and activity. Earlier in the year she had begun to receive
messages from spiritual beings, whom she called the Guardians, located
on other planets. It was these messages, flowing through Marian Keech’s
hand via the device of “automatic writing,” that were to form the bulk
of the cult’s religious belief system. The teachings of the Guardians
were loosely linked to traditional Christian thought. No wonder that
one of the Guardians, Sananda, eventually “revealed” himself as the
current embodiment of Jesus.
The transmissions from the Guardians, always the subjects of much
discussion and interpretation among the group, gained new significance
when they began to foretell a great impending disaster—a flood that
would begin in the Western Hemisphere and eventually engulf the
world. Although the cultists were understandably alarmed at first,
further messages assured them that they and all those who believed in
the Lessons sent through Mrs. Keech would survive. Before the calamity,
spacemen were to arrive and carry off the believers in flying saucers to

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 93
a place of safety, presumably on another planet. Very little detail was
provided about the rescue except that the believers were to make
themselves ready for pickup by rehearsing certain passwords to be exchanged (“I left my hat at home.” “What is your question?” “I am my
own porter.”) and by removing all metal from their clothes—because
the wearing or carrying of metal made saucer travel “extremely dangerous.”
As Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter observed the preparations
during the weeks prior to the flood date, they noted with special interest
two significant aspects of the members’ behavior. First, the level of
commitment to the cult’s belief system was very high. In anticipation
of their departure from doomed Earth, irrevocable steps were taken by
the group members. Most had incurred the opposition of family and
friends to their beliefs but had persisted nonetheless in their convictions,
often when it meant losing the affections of these others. In fact, several
of the members were threatened by neighbors or family with legal actions designed to have them declared insane. In Dr. Armstrong’s case,
a motion was filed by his sister to have his two younger children taken
away. Many believers quit their jobs or neglected their studies to devote
full time to the movement. Some even gave or threw away their personal
belongings, expecting them shortly to be of no use. These were people
whose certainty that they had the truth allowed them to withstand
enormous social, economic, and legal pressures and whose commitment
to their dogma grew as each pressure was resisted.
The second significant aspect of the believers’ preflood actions was
a curious form of inaction. For individuals so clearly convinced of the
validity of their creed, they did surprisingly little to spread the word.
Although they did initially make public the news of the coming disaster,
there was no attempt to seek converts, to proselyte actively. They were
willing to sound the alarm and to counsel those who voluntarily responded to it, but that was all.
The group’s distaste for recruitment efforts was evident in various
ways besides the lack of personal persuasion attempts. Secrecy was
maintained in many matters—extra copies of the Lessons were burned,
passwords and secret signs were instituted, the contents of certain
private tape recordings were not to be discussed with outsiders (so
secret were the tapes that even longtime believers were prohibited from
taking notes of them). Publicity was avoided. As the day of disaster
approached, increasing numbers of newspaper, television, and radio
reporters converged on the group’s headquarters in the Keech house.
For the most part, these people were turned away or ignored. The most
frequent answer to their questions was, “No comment.” Although discouraged for a time, the media representatives returned with a ven-

94 / Influence
geance when Dr. Armstrong’s religious activities caused him to be fired
from his post on the college health service staff; one especially persistent
newsman had to be threatened with a lawsuit. A similar siege was repelled on the eve of the flood when a swarm of reporters pushed and
pestered the believers for information. Afterward, the researchers
summarized the group’s preflood stance on public exposure and recruitment in respectful tones: “Exposed to a tremendous burst of publicity,
they had made every attempt to dodge fame; given dozens of opportunities to proselyte, they had remained evasive and secretive and behaved
with an almost superior indifference.”
Eventually, when all the reporters and would-be converts had been
cleared from the house, the believers began making their final preparations for the arrival of the spaceship scheduled for midnight that night.
The scene, as viewed by Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter, must have
seemed like absurdist theater. Otherwise ordinary people—housewives,
college students, a high-school boy, a publisher, an M.D., a hardwarestore clerk and his mother—were participating earnestly in tragic
comedy. They took direction from a pair of members who were periodically in touch with the Guardians; Marian Keech’s written messages
from Sananda were being supplemented that evening by “the Bertha,”
a former beautician through whose tongue the “Creator” gave instruction. They rehearsed their lines diligently, calling out in chorus the responses to be made before entering the rescue saucer, “I am my own
porter.” “I am my own pointer.” They discussed seriously whether the
message from a caller identifying himself as Captain Video—a TV space
character of the time—was properly interpreted as a prank or a coded
communication from their rescuers. And they performed in costume.
In keeping with the admonition to carry nothing metallic aboard the
saucer, the believers wore clothing that had been cut open to allow the
metal pieces to be torn out. The metal eyelets in their shoes had been
ripped away. The women were braless or wore brassieres whose metal
stays had been removed. The men had yanked the zippers out of their
pants, which were supported by lengths of rope in place of belts.
The group’s fanaticism concerning the removal of all metal was
vividly experienced by one of the researchers who remarked, twentyfive minutes before midnight, that he had forgotten to extract the zipper
from his trousers. As the observers tell it, “this knowledge produced a
near panic reaction. He was rushed into the bedroom where Dr. Armstrong, his hands trembling and his eyes darting to the clock every few
seconds, slashed out the zipper with a razor blade and wrenched its
clasps free with wire-cutters.” The hurried operation finished, the researcher was returned to the living room a slightly less metallic but,
one supposes, much paler man.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 95
As the time appointed for their departure grew very close, the believers settled into a lull of soundless anticipation. With trained scientists
on site, we are afforded a detailed account of the events that transpired
during this momentous period in the life of the group:
The last ten minutes were tense ones for the group in the living
room. They had nothing to do but sit and wait, their coats in their
laps. In the tense silence two clocks ticked loudly, one about ten
minutes faster than the other. When the faster of the two pointed
to twelve-five, one of the observers remarked aloud on the fact. A
chorus of people replied that midnight had not yet come. Bob
Eastman affirmed that the slower clock was correct; he had set it
himself only that afternoon. It showed only four minutes before
midnight.
These four minutes passed in complete silence except for a single
utterance. When the [slower] clock on the mantel showed only one
minute remaining before the guide to the saucer was due, Marian
exclaimed in a strained, high-pitched voice: “And not a plan has
gone astray!” The clock chimed twelve, each stroke painfully clear
in the expectant hush. The believers sat motionless.
One might have expected some visible reaction. Midnight had
passed and nothing had happened. The cataclysm itself was less
than seven hours away. But there was little to see in the reactions
of the people in that room. There was no talking, no sound. People
sat stock-still, their faces seemingly frozen and expressionless. Mark
Post was the only person who even moved. He lay down on the
sofa and closed his eyes but did not sleep. Later, when spoken to,
he answered monosyllabically but otherwise lay immobile. The
others showed nothing on the surface, although it became clear
later that they had been hit hard.
Gradually, painfully, an atmosphere of despair and confusion
settled over the group. They reexamined the prediction and the
accompanying messages. Dr. Armstrong and Mrs. Keech reiterated
their faith. The believers mulled over their predicament and discarded explanation after explanation as unsatisfactory. At one point,
toward 4 A.M., Mrs. Keech broke down and cried bitterly. She knew,
she sobbed, that there were some who were beginning to doubt
but that the group must beam light to those who needed it most
and that the group must hold together. The rest of the believers
were losing their composure, too. They were all visibly shaken and
many were close to tears. It was now almost 4:30 A.M., and still no
way of handling the disconfirmation had been found. By now, too,

96 / Influence
most of the group were talking openly about the failure of the escort
to come at midnight. The group seemed near dissolution.
In the midst of this gathering doubt, as cracks crawled through the
believers’ confidence, the researchers witnessed a pair of remarkable
incidents, one after another. The first occurred at about 4:45 A.M., when
Marian Keech’s hand suddenly leapt to the task of transcribing through
“automatic writing” the text of a holy message from above. When read
aloud, the communication proved to be an elegant explanation for the
events of that night. “The little group, sitting alone all night long, had
spread so much light that God had saved the world from destruction.”
Although neat and efficient, this explanation was not wholly satisfying
by itself; for example, after hearing it, one member simply rose, put on
his hat and coat, and left. Something additional was needed to restore
the believers to their previous levels of faith.
It was at this point that the second notable incident occurred to meet
that need. Once again, the words of those who were present offer a
vivid description:
The atmosphere in the group changed abruptly and so did their
behavior. Within minutes after she had read the message explaining
the disconfirmation, Mrs. Keech received another message instructing her to publicize the explanation. She reached for the telephone
and began dialing the number of a newspaper. While she was
waiting to be connected, someone asked: “Marian, is this the first
time you have called the newspaper yourself?” Her reply was immediate: “Oh, yes, this is the first time I have ever called them. I
have never had anything to tell them before, but now I feel it is
urgent.” The whole group could have echoed her feelings, for they
all felt a sense of urgency. As soon as Marian had finished her call,
the other members took turns telephoning newspapers, wire services, radio stations, and national magazines to spread the explanation of the failure of the flood. In their desire to spread the word
quickly and resoundingly, the believers now opened for public attention matters that had been thus far utterly secret. Where only
hours earlier they had shunned newspaper reporters and felt that
the attention they were getting in the press was painful, they now
became avid seekers for publicity.
Not only had the long-standing policies concerning secrecy and
publicity done an about-face, so, too, had the group’s attitude toward
potential converts. Whereas likely recruits who previously visited the
house had been mostly ignored, turned away, or treated with casual
attention, the day following the disconfirmation saw a different story.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 97
All callers were admitted, all questions were answered, attempts were
made to proselyte all such visitors. The members’ unprecedented willingness to accommodate possible new recruits was perhaps best demonstrated when nine high-school students arrived on the following
night to speak with Mrs. Keech.
They found her at the telephone deep in a discussion of flying
saucers with a caller whom, it later turned out, she believed to be
a spaceman. Eager to continue talking to him and at the same time
anxious to keep her new guests, Marian simply included them in
the conversation and, for more than an hour, chatted alternately
with her guests in the living room and the “spaceman” on the
other end of the telephone. So intent was she on proselyting that
she seemed unable to let any opportunity go by.
To what can we attribute the believers’ radical turnabout? In the space
of a few hours, they went from clannish and taciturn hoarders of the
Word to expansive and eager disseminators of it. And what could have
possessed them to choose such an ill-timed instant—when the failure
of the flood was likely to cause nonbelievers to view the group and its
dogma as laughable?
The crucial event occurred sometime during “the night of the flood,”
when it became increasingly clear that the prophecy would not be fulfilled. Oddly, it was not their prior certainty that drove the members
to propagate the faith; it was an encroaching sense of uncertainty. It
was the dawning realization that if the spaceship and flood predictions
were wrong, so might be the entire belief system on which they rested.
For those huddled in the Keech living room, that growing possibility
must have seemed hideous.
The group members had gone too far, given up too much for their
beliefs to see them destroyed; the shame, the economic cost, the mockery
would be too great to bear. The overarching need of the cultists to cling
to those beliefs seeps poignantly from their own words: From a young
woman with a three-year-old child:
I have to believe the flood is coming on the twenty-first because
I’ve spent all my money. I quit my job, I quit computer school…. I
have to believe.
And from Dr. Armstrong to one of the researchers four hours after
the failure of the saucermen to arrive:
I’ve had to go a long way. I’ve given up just about everything. I’ve
cut every tie. I’ve burned every bridge. I’ve turned my back on the

98 / Influence
world. I can’t afford to doubt. I have to believe. And there isn’t any
other truth.
Imagine the corner in which Dr. Armstrong and his followers found
themselves as morning approached. So massive was the commitment
to their beliefs that no other truth was tolerable. Yet that set of beliefs
had just taken a merciless pounding from physical reality: No saucer
had landed, no spacemen had knocked, no flood had come, nothing
had happened as prophesied. Since the only acceptable form of truth
had been undercut by physical proof, there was but one way out of the
corner for the group. They had to establish another type of proof for
the validity of their beliefs: social proof.
This, then, explains their sudden shift from secretive conspirators to
zealous missionaries. And it explains the curious timing of the
shift—precisely when a direct disconfirmation of their beliefs had
rendered them least convincing to outsiders. It was necessary to risk
the scorn and derision of the nonbelievers because publicity and recruitment efforts provided the only remaining hope. If they could spread
the Word, if they could inform the uninformed, if they could persuade
the skeptics, and if, by so doing, they could win new converts, their
threatened but treasured beliefs would become truer. The principle of
social proof says so: The greater the number of people who find any
idea correct, the more the idea will be correct. The group’s assignment
was clear; since the physical evidence could not be changed, the social
evidence had to be. Convince and ye shall be convinced!6

CAUSE OF DEATH: UNCERTAIN(TY)
All the weapons of influence discussed in this book work better under
some conditions than under others. If we are to defend ourselves adequately against any such weapon, it is vital that we know its optimal
operating conditions in order to recognize when we are most vulnerable
to its influence. In the case of the principle of social proof, we have
already had a hint of one time when it works best. Among the Chicago
believers, it was a sense of shaken confidence that triggered their craving
for converts. In general, when we are unsure of ourselves, when the
situation is unclear or ambiguous, when uncertainty reigns, we are
most likely to look to and accept the actions of others as correct.
In the process of examining the reactions of other people to resolve
our uncertainty, however, we are likely to overlook a subtle but important fact. Those people are probably examining the social evidence, too.
Especially in an ambiguous situation, the tendency for everyone to be
looking to see what everyone else is doing can lead to a fascinating

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 99
phenomenon called “pluralistic ignorance.” A thorough understanding
of the pluralistic ignorance phenomenon helps immeasurably to explain
a regular occurrence in our country that has been termed both a riddle
and a national disgrace: the failure of entire groups of bystanders to
aid victims in agonizing need of help.
The classic example of such bystander inaction and the one that has
produced the most debate in journalistic, political, and scientific circles
began as an ordinary homicide case in the borough of Queens in New
York City. A woman in her late twenties, Catherine Genovese, was
killed in a late-night attack on her home street as she returned from
work. Murder is never an act to be passed off lightly, but in a city the
size and tenor of New York, the Genovese incident warranted no more
space than a fraction of a column in The New York Times. Catherine
Genovese’s story would have died with her on that day in March 1964
if it hadn’t been for a mistake.
The metropolitan editor of the Times, A. M. Rosenthal, happened to
be having lunch with the city police commissioner a week later.
Rosenthal asked the commissioner about a different Queens-based
homicide, and the commissioner, thinking he was being questioned
about the Genovese case, revealed something staggering that had been
uncovered by the police investigation. It was something that left
everyone who heard it, the commissioner included, aghast and grasping
for explanations. Catherine Genovese had not experienced a quick,
muffled death. It had been a long, loud, tortured, public event. Her assailant had chased and attacked her in the street three times over a
period of thirty-five minutes before his knife finally silenced her cries
for help. Incredibly, thirty-eight of her neighbors watched the events
of her death unfold from the safety of their apartment windows without
so much as lifting a finger to call the police.
Rosenthal, a former Pulitzer Prize—winning reporter, knew a story
when he heard one. On the day of his lunch with the commissioner, he
assigned a reporter to investigate the “bystander angle” of the Genovese
incident. Within a week, the Times published a long, page 1 article that
was to create a swirl of controversy and speculation. The first few
paragraphs of that report provide the tone and focus of the burgeoning
story:
For more than half an hour thirty-eight respectable, law-abiding
citizens in Queens watched a killer stalk and stab a woman in three
separate attacks in Kew Gardens.
Twice the sound of their voices and the sudden glow of their
bedroom lights interrupted him and frightened him off. Each time
he returned, sought her out, and stabbed her again. Not one person

100 / Influence
telephoned the police during the assault; one witness called after
the woman was dead.
That was two weeks ago today. But Assistant Chief Inspector
Frederick M. Lussen, in charge of the borough’s detectives and a
veteran of twenty-five years of homicide investigations, is still
shocked.
He can give a matter-of-fact recitation of many murders. But the
Kew Gardens slaying baffles him—not because it is a murder, but
because “good people” failed to call the police.
As with Assistant Chief Inspector Lussen, shock and bafflement were
the standard reactions of almost everyone who learned the story’s details. The shock struck first, leaving the police, the news-people, and
the reading public stunned. The bafflement followed quickly. How
could thirty-eight “good people” fail to act under those circumstances?
No one could understand it. Even the murder witnesses themselves
were bewildered. “I don’t know,” they answered one after another. “I
just don’t know.” A few offered weak reasons for their inaction. For
example, two or three people explained that they were “afraid” or “did
not want to get involved.” But these reasons do not stand up to close
scrutiny: A simple anonymous call to the police could have saved
Catherine Genovese without threatening the witness’s future safety or
free time. No, it wasn’t the observers’ fear or reluctance to complicate
their lives that explained their lack of action; something else was going
on there that even they could not fathom.
Confusion, though, does not make for good news copy. So the press
as well as the other media—several papers, TV stations, and magazines
were pursuing follow-up stories by now—emphasized the only explanation available at the time: The witnesses, no different from the rest of
us, hadn’t cared enough to get involved. We were becoming a nation
of selfish, insensitive people. The rigors of modern life, especially city
life, were hardening us. We were becoming “The Cold Society,” unfeeling and indifferent to the plight of our fellow citizens.
In support of this interpretation, news stories began appearing regularly in which various kinds of public apathy were detailed. The Times
actually appears to have developed an apathy “beat” for a period following the Genovese revelations. Also supporting such an interpretation
were the remarks of a range of armchair social commentators, who, as
a breed, seem never to admit to bafflement when speaking to the press.
They, too, saw the Genovese case as having large-scale social significance. All used the word “apathy,” which, it is interesting to note, had
been in the headline of the Times’s front-page story, although they accounted for the apathy differently. One attributed it to the effects of TV

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 101
violence, another to repressed aggressiveness, but most implicated the
“depersonalization” of urban life with its “megalopolitan societies”
and its “alienation of the individual from the group.” Even Rosenthal,
the newsman who first broke the story and who ulti-mately made it
the subject of a book, subscribed to the city-caused apathy theory.
Nobody can say why the thirty-eight did not lift the phone while
Miss Genovese was being attacked, since they cannot say themselves. It can be assumed, however, that their apathy was indeed
one of the big-city variety. It is almost a matter of psychological
survival, if one is surrounded and pressed by millions of people,
to prevent them from constantly impinging on you, and the only
way to do this is to ignore them as often as possible. Indifference
to one’s neighbor and his troubles is a conditioned reflex in life in
New York as it is in other big cities.7
As the Genovese story grew—aside from Rosenthal’s book, it became
the focus of numerous newspaper and magazine pieces, several television-news documentaries, and an off-Broadway play—it attracted the
professional attention of a pair of New York-based psychology professors, Bibb Latan and John Darley. They examined the reports of the
Genovese incident and, on the basis of their knowledge of social psychology, hit on what had seemed the most unlikely explanation of all—it
was that thirty-eight witnesses were present. Previous accounts of the
story had invariably emphasized that no action was taken, even though
thirty-eight individuals had looked on. Latan and Darley suggested
that no one had helped precisely because there were so many observers.
The psychologists speculated that, for at least two reasons, a bystander
to an emergency would be unlikely to help when there were a number
of other bystanders present. The first reason is fairly straightforward.
With several potential helpers around, the personal responsibility of
each individual is reduced: “Perhaps someone else will give or call for
aid, perhaps someone else already has.” So with everyone thinking that
someone else will help or has helped, no one does.
The second reason is the more psychologically intriguing one; it is
founded on the principle of social proof and involves the pluralistic
ignorance effect. Very often an emergency is not obviously an emergency. Is the man lying in the alley a heart-attack victim or a drunk
sleeping one off? Are the sharp sounds from the street gunshots or truck
backfires? Is the commotion next door an assault requiring the police
or an especially loud marital spat where intervention would be inappropriate and unwelcome? What is going on? In times of such uncertainty,
the natural tendency is to look around at the actions of others for clues.

102 / Influence
We can learn, from the way the other witnesses are reacting, whether
the event is or is not an emergency.
What is easy to forget, though, is that everybody else observing the
event is likely to be looking for social evidence, too. And because we
all prefer to appear poised and unflustered among others, we are likely
to search for that evidence placidly, with brief, camouflaged glances at
those around us. Therefore everyone is likely to see everyone else
looking unruffled and failing to act. As a result, and by the principle of
social proof, the event will be roundly interpreted as a nonemergency.
This, according to Latan and Darley, is the state of pluralistic ignorance
“in which each person decides that since nobody is concerned, nothing
is wrong. Meanwhile, the danger may be mounting to the point where
a single individual, uninfluenced by the seeming calm of others, would
react.”8
The fascinating upshot of Latan and Darley’s reasoning is that, for
the emergency victim, the idea of “safety in numbers” may often be
completely wrong. It might be that someone in need of emergency aid
would have a better chance of survival if a single bystander, rather than
a crowd, was present. To test this unusual thesis, Darley, Latan, their
students and colleagues performed a systematic and impressive program
of research that produced a clear set of findings. Their basic procedure
was to stage emergency events that were observed either by a single
individual or by a group of people. They then recorded the number of
times the emergency victim received help under those circumstances.
In their first experiment, a New York college student who appeared to
be having an epileptic seizure received help 85 percent of the time when
there was a single bystander present but only 31 percent of the time
with five bystanders present. With almost all the single bystanders
helping, it becomes difficult to argue that ours is “The Cold Society”
where no one cares for suffering others. Obviously it was something
about the presence of other bystanders that reduced helping to shameful
levels.
Other studies have examined the importance of social proof in causing
widespread witness “apathy.” They have done so by planting within
a group of witnesses to a possible emergency people who are rehearsed
to act as if no emergency were occurring. For instance, in another New
York—based experiment, 75 percent of lone individuals who observed
smoke seeping from under a door reported the leak; however, when
similar leaks were observed by three-person groups, the smoke was
reported only 38 percent of the time. The smallest number of bystanders
took action, though, when the three-person groups included two individuals who had been coached to ignore the smoke; under those conditions, the leaks were reported only 10 percent of the time. In a similar

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 103
study conducted in Toronto, single bystanders provided emergency
aid 90 percent of the time, whereas such aid occurred in only 16 percent
of the cases when a bystander was in the presence of two other
bystanders who remained passive.
After more than a decade of such research, social scientists now have
a good idea of when a bystander will offer emergency aid. First, and
contrary to the view that we have become a society of callous, uncaring
people, once witnesses are convinced that an emergency situation exists,
aid is very likely. Under these conditions, the numbers of bystanders
who either intervene themselves or summon help is quite comforting.
For example, in four separate experiments done in Florida, accident
scenes involving a maintenance man were staged. When it was clear
that the man was hurt and required assistance, he was helped 100 percent of the time in two of the experiments. In the other two experiments,
where helping involved contact with potentially dangerous electrical
wires, the victim still received bystander aid in 90 percent of the instances. In addition, these extremely high levels of assistance occurred
whether the witnesses observed the event singly or in groups.9
The situation becomes very different when, as in many cases,
bystanders cannot be sure that the event they are witnessing is an
emergency. Then a victim is much more likely to be helped by a lone
bystander than by a group, especially if the people in the group are
strangers to one another. It seems that the pluralistic ignorance effect
is strongest among strangers: Because we like to look poised and
sophisticated in public and because we are unfamiliar with the reactions
of those we do not know, we are unlikely to give off or correctly read
expressions of concern when in a grouping of strangers. Therefore, a
possible emergency becomes viewed as a nonemergency, and the victim
suffers.10
A close look at this set of research findings reveals an enlightening
pattern. All the conditions that decrease an emergency victim’s chances
for bystander aid exist normally and innocently in the city: (1) In contrast
to rural areas, cities are more clamorous, distracting, rapidly changing
places where it is difficult to be certain of the nature of the events one
encounters. (2) Urban environments are more populous, by their nature;
consequently, people are more likely to be with others when witnessing
a potential emergency situation. (3) City dwellers know a much smaller
percentage of fellow residents than do people who live in small towns;
therefore, city dwellers are more likely to find themselves in a group
of strangers when observing an emergency.
These three natural characteristics of urban environments—their
confusion, their populousness, and their low levels of acquaintanceship—fit in very well with the factors shown by research to decrease

104 / Influence
bystander aid. Without ever having to resort to such sinister concepts
as “urban depersonalization” and “megalopolitan alienation,” then, we
can explain why so many instances of bystander inaction occur in our
cities.

Devictimizing Yourself
But explaining the dangers of modern urban life in less ominous terms
does not dispel them. And as the world’s populations move increasingly
to the cities—half of all humanity will be city dwellers within ten
years—there will be a growing need to reduce those dangers. Fortunately, our newfound understanding of the bystander “apathy” process
offers real hope. Armed with this scientific knowledge, an emergency
victim can increase enormously the chances of receiving aid from others.
The key is the realization that groups of bystanders fail to help because
the bystanders are unsure rather than unkind. They don’t help because
they are unsure of whether an emergency actually exists and whether
they are responsible for taking action. When they are sure of their responsibilities for intervening in a clear emergency, people are exceedingly responsive!
Once it is understood that the enemy is not some unmanageable societal condition like urban depersonalization but is, instead, the simple
state of uncertainty, it becomes possible for emergency victims to take
specific steps to protect themselves by reducing the bystanders’ uncertainty. Imagine, for example, you are spending a summer afternoon at
a music concert in the park. As the concert ends and people begin
leaving, you notice a slight numbness in one arm but dismiss it as
nothing to be alarmed about. Yet, while moving with the crowd to the
distant parking areas, you feel the numbness spreading down to your
hand and up one side of your face. Feeling disoriented, you decide to
sit against a tree for a moment to rest. Soon you realize that something
is drastically wrong. Sitting down has not helped; in fact, the control
and coordination of your muscles has worsened to the point that you
are starting to have difficulty moving your mouth and tongue to speak.
You try to get up but can’t. A terrifying thought slashes to mind: “Oh,
God, I’m having a stroke!” Groups of people are passing by and most
are paying you no attention. The few who notice the odd way you are
slumped against the tree or the strange look on your face check the social
evidence around them and, seeing that no one else is reacting with
concern, walk on past convinced that nothing is wrong.
Were you to find yourself in such a predicament, what could you do
to overcome the odds against receiving help? Because your physical
abilities would be deteriorating, time would be crucial. If, before you

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 105
could summon aid, you lost your speech or mobility or consciousness,
your chances for assistance and for recovery would plunge drastically.
It would be essential to try to request help quickly. But what would the
most effective form of that request be? Moans, groans, or outcries
probably would not do. They might bring you some attention, but they
would not provide enough information to assure passersby that a true
emergency existed.
If mere outcries are unlikely to produce help from the passing crowd,
perhaps you should be more specific. Indeed, you need to do more than
try to gain attention; you should call out clearly your need for assistance.
You must not allow bystanders to define your situation as a nonemergency. Use the word “Help” to cry out your need for emergency aid.
And don’t worry about being wrong. Embarrassment is a villain to be
crushed here. In the context of a possible stroke, you cannot afford to
be worried about the awkwardness of overestimating your problem.
The difference in cost is that between a moment of embarrassment and
possible death or lifelong paralysis.
But even a resounding call for help is not your most effective tactic.
Although it may reduce bystanders’ doubts about whether a real
emergency exists, it will not remove several other important uncertainties within each onlooker’s mind: What kind of aid is required here?
Should I be the one to provide the aid, or should someone more qualified
do it? Has someone else already gone to get professional help, or is it
my responsibility? While the bystanders stand gawking at you and
grappling with these questions, time vital to your survival could be
slipping away.
Clearly, then, as a victim you must do more than alert bystanders to
your need for emergency assistance; you must also remove their uncertainties about how that assistance should be provided and who should
provide it. But what would be the most efficient and reliable way to do
so?
Based on the research findings we have seen, my advice would be to
isolate one individual from the crowd: Stare, speak, and point directly
at that person and no one else: “You, sir, in the blue jacket, I need help.
Call an ambulance.” With that one utterance you should dispel all the
uncertainties that might prevent or delay help. With that one statement
you will have put the man in the blue jacket in the role of “rescuer.”
He should now understand that emergency aid is needed; he should
understand that he, not someone else, is responsible for providing the
aid; and, finally, he should understand exactly how to provide it. All
the scientific evidence indicates that the result should be quick, effective
assistance.

106 / Influence
In general, then, your best strategy when in need of emergency help
is to reduce the uncertainties of those around you concerning your
condition and their responsibilities. Be as precise as possible about your
need for aid. Do not allow bystanders to come to their own conclusions
because, especially in a crowd, the principle of social proof and the
consequent pluralistic ignorance effect might well cause them to view
your situation as a nonemergency.
And request assistance of a single individual from the group of onlookers. Fight the natural tendency to make a general request for help.
Pick out one person and assign the task to that individual. Otherwise,
it is too easy for everyone in the crowd to assume that someone else
should help, will help, or has helped. Of all the techniques in this book
designed to produce compliance with a request, this one may be the
most important to remember. After all, the failure of your request for
emergency aid could have severe personal consequences.
Not long ago, I received some firsthand evidence on this point. I was
involved in a rather serious automobile collision. Both I and the other
driver were plainly hurt: He was slumped, unconscious, over his
steering wheel while I managed to stagger, bloody, from behind mine.
The accident had occurred in the center of an intersection in full view
of several individuals stopped in their cars at the traffic light. As I knelt
in the road beside my door, trying to clear my head, the light changed
and the waiting cars began to roll slowly through the intersection; their
drivers gawked but did not stop.
I remember thinking, “Oh no, it’s happening just like the research
says. They’re all passing by!” I consider it fortunate that, as a social
psychologist, I knew enough about the bystander studies to have that
particular thought. By thinking of my predicament in terms of the research findings, I knew exactly what to do. Pulling myself up so I could
be seen clearly, I pointed at the driver of one car: “Call the police.” To
a second and a third driver, pointing directly each time: “Pull over, we
need help.” The responses of these people were instantaneous. They
summoned a police car and ambulance immediately, they used their
handkerchiefs to blot the blood from my face, they put a jacket under
my head, they volunteered to serve as witnesses to the accident; one
even offered to ride with me to the hospital.
Not only was this help rapid and solicitous, it was infectious. After
drivers entering the intersection from the other direction saw cars
stopping for me, they stopped and began tending to the other victim.
The principle of social proof was working for us now. The trick had
been to get the ball rolling in the direction of aid. Once that was accomplished, I was able to relax and let the bystanders’ genuine concern and
social proof’s natural momentum do the rest.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 107

MONKEY ME, MONKEY DO
A bit earlier we stated that the principle of social proof, like all other
weapons of influence, works better under some conditions than under
others. We have already explored one of those conditions: uncertainty.
Without question, when people are uncertain, they are more likely to
use others’ actions to decide how they themselves should act. But, in
addition, there is another important working condition: similarity. The
principle of social proof operates most powerfully when we are observing the behavior of people just like us. It is the conduct of such
people that gives us the greatest insight into what constitutes correct
behavior for ourselves. Therefore we are more inclined to follow the
lead of a similar individual than a dissimilar one.
That is why I believe we are seeing an increasing number of averageperson-on-the-street testimonials on TV these days. Advertisers now
know that one successful way to sell a product to ordinary viewers
(who compose the largest potential market) is to demonstrate that other
“ordinary” people like and use it. So whether the product is a brand of
soft drink, or a pain reliever, or a laundry detergent, we hear volleys
of praise from John or Mary Every-person.
More compelling evidence for the importance of similarity in determining whether we will imitate another’s behavior comes from scientific
research. An especially apt illustration can be found in a study done
several years ago by Columbia University psychologists. The researchers
placed wallets on the ground in various locations around midtown
Manhattan to observe what would happen when they were found. The
wallets all contained $2.00 in cash, a $26.30 check, and various information providing the name and address of the wallet’s “owner.” In addition to this material, the wallet also contained a letter that made it
evident that the wallet had been lost not once, but twice. The letter was
written to the wallet’s owner from a man who had found it earlier and
whose intention was to return it. The finder indicated in his letter that
he was happy to help and that the chance to be of service in this way
had made him feel good.
It was evident to anyone who found one of these wallets that this
well-intentioned individual had then lost the wallet himself on the way
to the mailbox—the wallet was wrapped in an envelope addressed to
the owner. The researchers wanted to know how many people finding
such a wallet would follow the lead of the first finder and mail it, intact,
to the original owner. Before they dropped the wallets, however, the
researchers varied one feature of the letter it contained. Some of the
letters were written in standard English by what seemed to be an aver-

108 / Influence
age American, while the other letters were written in broken English
by the first finder, who identified himself as a recently arrived foreigner.
In other words, the person who had initially found the wallet and had
tried to return it was depicted by the letter as being either similar or
dissimilar to most Americans.
The interesting question was whether the Manhattanites who found
the wallet and letter would be more influenced to mail the wallet if the
first man who had tried to do so was similar to them. The answer was
plain: Only 33 percent of the wallets were returned when the first
finder was seen as dissimilar, but fully 70 percent were returned when
he was thought to be a similar other. These results suggest an important
qualification of the principle of social proof. We will use the actions of
others to decide on proper behavior for ourselves, especially when we
view those others as similar to ourselves.
This tendency applies not only to adults but to children as well. Health
researchers have found, for example, that a school-based antismoking
program had lasting effects only when it used same-age peer leaders
as teachers. Another study found that children who saw a film depicting
a child’s positive visit to the dentist lowered their own dental anxieties
principally when they were the same age as the child in the film. I wish
I had known about this second study when, a few years before it was
published, I was trying to reduce a different kind of anxiety in my son,
Chris.
I live in Arizona, where backyard swimming pools abound. One regrettable consequence is that every year several young children drown
after falling into an unattended pool. I was determined, therefore, to
teach Chris how to swim at an early age. The problem was not that he
was afraid of the water. He loved it. But he would not get into the pool
without wearing his inflatable plastic inner tube, no matter how I tried
to coax, talk, or shame him out of it. After getting nowhere for two
months, I hired some help: a graduate student of mine—a big, strapping
former lifeguard who had once worked as a swimming instructor. He
failed as totally as I had. He couldn’t persuade Chris to attempt even
a stroke outside of his plastic ring.
Around this time, Chris was attending a day camp that provided a
number of activities to its members, including use of a large pool, which
he scrupulously avoided. One day, shortly after the graduate student
fiasco, I went to get Chris from camp a bit early and, with mouth agape,
watched him run down the diving board and jump into the middle of
the deepest part of the pool. Panicking, I began pulling off my shoes to
jump in to his rescue when I saw him bob to the surface and paddle
safely to the side of the pool—where I dashed, shoes in hand, to meet
him.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 109
“Chris, you can swim,” I said excitedly. “You can swim!”
“Yes,” he responded casually, “I learned how today.”
“This is terrific! This is just terrific,” I burbled, gesturing expansively
to convey my enthusiasm. “But how come you didn’t need your plastic
ring today?”
Looking somewhat embarrassed because his father seemed to be
raving while inexplicably soaking his socks in a small puddle and
waving his shoes around, Chris explained: “Well, I’m three years old,
and Tommy is three years old. And Tommy can swim without a ring,
so that means I can too.”
I could have kicked myself. Of course, it would be to little Tommy,
not to a six-foot-two-inch graduate student, that Chris would look for
the most relevant information about what he could or should do. Had
I been more thoughtful about solving Chris’s swimming problem, I
could have employed Tommy’s good example earlier and, perhaps,
have saved myself a couple of frustrating months. I could have simply
noted at the day camp that Tommy was a swimmer and then arranged
with his parents for the boys to spend a weekend afternoon swimming
in our pool. My guess is that Chris’s plastic ring would have been
abandoned by the end of the day.11
Any factor that can spur 70 percent of New Yorkers to return a wallet
(or can reduce the likelihood that kids will take up smoking or will fear
a dentist visit) must be considered impressive. Yet research findings of
this sort offer just a hint of the immense impact that the conduct of
similar others has on human behavior. Other, more powerful examples
exist. To my mind, the most telling illustration of this impact starts with
a seemingly nonsensical statistic: After a suicide has made front-page
news, airplanes—private planes, corporate jets, airliners—begin falling
out of the sky at an alarming rate.
For example, it has been shown that immediately following certain
kinds of highly publicized suicide stories, the number of people who
die in commercial-airline crashes increases by 1,000 percent! Even more
alarming: The increase is not limited to airplane deaths. The number
of automobile fatalities shoots up as well.12 What could possibly be
responsible?
One explanation suggests itself immediately: The same social conditions that cause some people to commit suicide cause others to die accidentally. For instance, certain individuals, the suicide-prone, may react
to stressful societal events (economic downturns, rising crime rates,
international tensions) by ending it all. But others will react differently
to these same events; they might become angry or impatient or nervous
or distracted. To the degree that such people operate (or service) the

110 / Influence
cars and planes of our society, the vehicles will be less safe, and, consequently, we will see a sharp increase in the number of automobile
and air fatalities.
According to this “social conditions” interpretation, then, some of
the same societal factors that cause intentional deaths also cause accidental ones, and that is why we find so strong a connection between
suicide stories and fatal crashes. But another fascinating statistic indicates that this is not the correct explanation: Fatal crashes increase dramatically only in those regions where the suicide has been highly publicized. Other places, existing under similar social conditions, whose
newspapers have not publicized the story, have shown no comparable
jump in such fatalities. Furthermore, within those areas where newspaper space has been allotted, the wider the publicity given the suicide,
the greater has been the rise in subsequent crashes. Thus it is not some
set of common societal events that stimulates suicides on the one hand,
and fatal accidents on the other. Instead it is the publicized suicide story
itself that produces the car and plane wrecks.
To explain the strong association between suicide-story publicity and
subsequent crashes, a “bereavement” account has been suggested. Because, it has been argued, front-page suicides often in-volve well-known
and respected public figures, perhaps their highly publicized deaths
throw many people into states of shocked sadness. Stunned and preoccupied, these individuals become careless around cars and planes. The
consequence is the sharp increase in deadly accidents involving such
vehicles that we see after front-page suicide stories. Although the bereavement theory can account for the connection between the degree
of publicity given a story and subsequent crash fatalities—the more
people who learn of the suicide, the larger number of bereaved and
careless individuals there will be—it cannot explain yet another startling
fact: Newspaper stories reporting on suicide victims who died alone
produce an increase in the frequency of single-fatality wrecks only,
whereas stories reporting on suicide-plus-murder incidents produce
an increase in multiple-fatality wrecks only. Simple bereavement could
not cause such a pattern.
The influence of suicide stories on car and plane crashes, then, is
fantastically specific. Stories of pure suicides, in which only one person
dies, generate wrecks in which only one person dies; stories of suicidemurder combinations, in which there are multiple deaths, generate
wrecks in which there are multiple deaths. If neither “social conditions”
nor “bereavement” account for this bewildering array of facts, what
can? There is a sociologist at the University of California at San Diego
who thinks he has found the answer. His name is David Phillips, and
he points a convincing finger at something called the “Werther effect.”

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 111
The story of the Werther effect is both chilling and intriguing. More
than two centuries ago, the great man of German literature, Johann von
Goethe, published a novel entitled Die Leiden des jungen Werthers (The
Sorrows of Young Werther). The book, in which the hero, named Werther,
commits suicide, had a remarkable impact. Not only did it provide
Goethe with immediate fame, but it also sparked a wave of emulative
suicides across Europe. So powerful was this effect that authorities in
several countries banned the novel.
Professor Phillips’s own work has traced the Werther effect to modern
times. His research has demonstrated that immediately following a
front-page suicide story the suicide rate increases dra-matically in those
geographical areas where the story has been highly publicized. It is
Phillips’s argument that certain troubled people who read of another’s
self-inflicted death kill themselves in imitation. In a morbid illustration
of the principle of social proof, these people decide how they should
act on the basis of how some other troubled person has acted.
Phillips got his evidence for the modern-day Werther effect by examining the suicide statistics in the United States between 1947 and
1968. He found that within two months after every front-page suicide
story, an average of fifty-eight more people than usual killed themselves.
In a sense, each suicide story killed fifty-eight people who otherwise
would have gone on living. Phillips also found that this tendency for
suicides to beget suicides occurred principally in those parts of the
country where the first suicide was highly publicized and that the wider
the publicity given the first suicide, the greater the number of later
suicides.
If the facts surrounding the Werther effect seem to you suspiciously
like those surrounding the influence of suicide stories on air and traffic
fatalities, the similarities have not been lost on Professor Phillips either.
In fact, he contends that all the excess deaths following a front-page
suicide incident can be explained as the same thing: copycat suicides.
Upon learning of another’s suicide, an uncomfortably large number of
people decide that suicide is an appropriate action for themselves as
well. Some of these individuals then proceed to commit the act in a
straightforward, no-bones-about-it fashion, causing the suicide rate to
jump.
Others, however, are less direct. For any of several reasons—to protect
their reputations, to spare their families the shame and hurt, to allow
their dependents to collect on insurance policies—they do not want to
appear to have killed themselves. They would rather seem to have died
accidentally. So, purposively but furtively, they cause the wreck of a
car or a plane they are operating or are simply riding in. This could be
accomplished in a variety of all-too-familiar-sounding ways. A commer-

112 / Influence
cial-airline pilot could dip the nose of the aircraft at a crucial point of
takeoff or could inexplicably land on an already occupied runway
against instructions from the control tower; the driver of a car could
suddenly swerve into a tree or into oncoming traffic; a passenger in an
automobile or corporate jet could incapacitate the operator, causing a
deadly crash; the pilot of a private plane could, despite all radio warnings, plow into another aircraft. Thus the alarming climb in crash
fatalities we find following front-page suicides is, according to Dr.
Phillips, most likely due to the Werther effect secretly applied.
I consider this insight brilliant. First, it explains all of the data beautifully. If these wrecks really are hidden instances of imitative suicide, it
makes sense that we should see an increase in the wrecks after suicide
stories appear. And it makes sense that the greatest rise in wrecks should
occur after the suicide stories that have been most widely publicized
and have, consequently, reached the most people. And it makes sense
that the number of crashes should jump appreciably only in those
geographical areas where the suicide stories were publicized. And it
even makes sense that single-victim suicides should lead only to singlevictim crashes, whereas multiple-victim suicide incidents should lead
only to multiple-victim crashes. Imitation is the key.
But there is a second valuable feature of Phillips’s insight. Not only
does it allow us to explain the existing facts, it also allows us to predict
new facts that had never been uncovered before. For example, if the
abnormally frequent crashes following publicized suicides are genuinely
due to imitative rather than accidental actions, they should be more
deadly as a result. That is, people trying to kill themselves will likely
arrange (with a foot on the accelerator instead of the brake, with the
nose of the plane down instead of up) for the impact to be as lethal as
possible. The consequence should be quick and sure death. When
Phillips examined the records to check on this prediction, he found that
the average number of people killed in a fatal crash of a commercial
airliner is more than three times greater if the crash happened one week
after a front-page suicide story than if it happened one week before. A
similar phenomenon can be found in traffic statistics, where there is
evidence for the deadly efficiency of postsuicide-story auto crashes.
Victims of fatal car wrecks that follow front-page suicide stories die
four times more quickly than normal.
Still another fascinating prediction flows from Phillips’s idea. If the
increase in wrecks following suicide stories truly represents a set of
copycat deaths, then the imitators should be most likely to copy the
suicides of people who are similar to them. The principle of social proof
states that we use information about how others have behaved to help
us determine proper conduct for ourselves. But as the dropped-wallet

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 113
experiment showed, we are most influenced in this fashion by the actions of others like us.
Therefore, Phillips reasoned, if the principle of social proof is behind
the phenomenon, there should be some clear similarity between the
victim of the highly publicized suicide and those who cause subsequent
wrecks. Realizing that the clearest test of this possibility would come
from the records of automobile crashes involving a single car and a lone
driver, Phillips compared the age of the suicide-story victim with the
ages of the lone drivers killed in single-car crashes immediately after
the story appeared in print. Once again the predictions were strikingly
accurate: When the newspaper detailed the suicide of a young person,
it was young drivers who then piled their cars into trees, poles, and
embankments with fatal results; but when the news story concerned
an older person’s suicide, older drivers died in such crashes.
This last statistic is the crusher for me. I am left wholly convinced
and, simultaneously, wholly amazed by it. Evidently, the principle of
social proof is so wide-ranging and powerful that its domain extends
to the fundamental decision for life or death. Professor Phillips’s findings
have persuaded me of a distressing tendency for suicide publicity to
motivate certain people who are similar to the victim to kill themselves—because they now find the idea of suicide more legitimate.
Truly frightening are the data indicating that many innocent people
die in the bargain. A glance at the graphs documenting the undeniable
increase in traffic and air fatalities following publicized suicides, especially those involving murder, is enough to cause concern for one’s own
safety. I have been sufficiently affected by these statistics to begin to
take note of front-page suicide stories and to change my behavior in
the period after their appearance. I try to be especially cautious behind
the wheel of my car. I am reluctant to take extended trips requiring a
lot of air travel. If I must fly during such a period, I purchase substantially more flight insurance than I normally would. Dr. Phillips has
done us a service by demonstrating that the odds for survival when we
travel change measurably for a time following the publication of certain
kinds of front-page suicide stories. It would seem only prudent to play
those odds.
As if the frightening features of Phillips’s suicide data weren’t enough,
his subsequent research brings more cause for alarm: Homicides in this
country have a stimulated, copycat character after highly publicized
acts of violence. Heavyweight championship prize fights that receive
coverage on network evening news appear to produce measurable increases in the U.S. homicide rate. This analysis of heavyweight championship fights (between 1973 and 1978) is perhaps most compelling in
its demonstration of the remarkably specific nature of the imitative

114 / Influence
aggression that is generated. When such a match was lost by a black
fighter, the homicide rate during the following ten days rose significantly for young black male victims but not young white males. On the
other hand, when a white fighter lost a match, it was young white men
but not young black men who were killed more frequently in the next
ten days.14 When these results are combined with the parallel findings
in Phillips’s suicide data, it is clear that widely publicized aggression
has the nasty tendency to spread to similar victims, no matter whether
the aggression is inflicted on the self or on another.
Work like Dr. Phillips’s helps us appreciate the awesome influence
of the behavior of similar others. Once the enormity of that force is recognized, it becomes possible to understand perhaps the most spectacular act of compliance of our time—the mass suicide at Jonestown,
Guyana. Certain crucial features of that event deserve review.
The People’s Temple was a cultlike organization that began in San
Francisco and drew its recruits from the poor of that city. In 1977, the
Reverend Jim Jones—who was the group’s undisputed political, social,
and spiritual leader—moved the bulk of the membership with him to
a jungle settlement in Guyana, South America. There, the People’s
Temple existed in relative obscurity until November 18, 1978, when
four men of a fact-finding party led by Congressman Leo J. Ryan were
murdered as they tried to leave Jonestown by plane. Convinced that
he would be arrested and implicated in the killings and that the demise
of the People’s Temple would result, Jones sought to control the end
of the Temple in his own way. He gathered the entire community
around him and issued a call for each person’s death in a unified act of
self-destruction.
The first response was that of a young woman who calmly approached the now famous vat of strawberry-flavored poison, administered one dose to her baby, one to herself, and then sat down in a
field, where she and her child died in convulsions within four minutes.
Others followed steadily in turn. Although a handful of Jonestowners
escaped rather than comply and a few others are reported to have resisted, the survivors claim that the great majority of the 910 people who
died did so in an orderly, willful fashion.
News of the event shocked us. The broadcast media and the papers
provided a barrage of reports, updates, and analyses. For days, our
conversations were full of the topic: “How many have they found dead
now?” “A guy who escaped says they were drinking the poison like
they were hypnotized or something.” “What were they doing down in
South America, anyway?” “It’s so hard to believe. What caused it?”
Yes, “What caused it?”—the critical question. How are we to account

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 115
for this most astounding of compliant acts? Various explanations have
been offered. Some have focused on the charisma of Jim Jones, a man
whose style allowed him to be loved like a savior, trusted like a father,
and treated like an emperor. Other explanations have pointed to the
kind of people who were attracted to the People’s Temple. They were
mostly poor and uneducated individuals who were willing to give up
their freedoms of thought and action for the safety of a place where all
decisions would be made for them. Still other explanations have emphasized the quasi-religious nature of the People’s Temple, in which
unquestioned faith in the cult’s leader was assigned highest priority.
No doubt each of these features of Jonestown has merit in explaining
what happened there. But I do not find them sufficient. After all, the
world abounds with cults populated by dependent people who are led
by a charismatic figure. What’s more, there has never been a shortage
of this combination of circumstances in the past. Yet virtually nowhere
do we find evidence of an event even approximating the Jonestown
incident among such groups. There must be something else that was
critical.
One especially revealing question gives us a clue: “If the community
had remained in San Francisco, would Rev. Jim Jones’s suicide command
have been obeyed?” A highly speculative question to be sure, but the
expert most familiar with the People’s Temple has no doubt about the
answer. Dr. Louis Jolyon West, chairman of psychiatry and biobehavioral sciences at UCLA and director of its neuropsychiatric unit, is an
authority on cults who had observed the People’s Temple for eight
years prior to the Jonestown deaths. When interviewed in the immediate
aftermath, he made what strikes me as an inordinately instructive
statement: “This wouldn’t have happened in California. But they lived
in total alienation from the rest of the world in a jungle situation in a
hostile country.”
Although lost in the welter of commentary following the tragedy,
Dr. West’s observation, together with what we know about the principle
of social proof, seems to me quite important to a satisfactory understanding of the compliant suicides. To my mind, the single act in the history
of the People’s Temple that most contrib-uted to the members’ mindless
compliance that day occurred a year earlier with the relocation of the
Temple to a jungled country of unfamiliar customs and strange people.
If we are to believe the stories of Jim Jones’s malevolent genius, he
realized fully the massive psychological impact such a move would
have on his followers. All at once, they found themselves in a place
they knew nothing about. South America, and the rain forests of Guyana,
especially, were unlike anything they had experienced in San Francisco.

116 / Influence
The country—both physical and social—into which they were dropped
must have seemed dreadfully uncertain.
Ah, uncertainty—the right-hand man of the principle of social proof.
We have already seen that when people are uncertain, they look to the
actions of others to guide their own actions. In the alien, Guyanese environment, then, Temple members were very ready to follow the lead
of others. But as we have also seen, it is others of a special kind whose
behavior will be most unquestioningly followed—similar others. And
therein lies the awful beauty of the Reverend Jim Jones’s relocation
strategy. In a country like Guyana, there were no similar others for a
Jonestown resident but the people of Jonestown itself.
What was right for a member of the community was determined to
a disproportionate degree by what other community members—influenced heavily by Jones—did and believed. When viewed in this light,
the terrible orderliness, the lack of panic, the sense of calm with which
these people moved to the vat of poison and to their deaths, seems more
comprehensible. They hadn’t been hypnotized by Jones; they had been
convinced—partly by him but, more important, also by the principle
of social proof—that suicide was correct conduct. The uncertainty they
surely felt upon first hearing the death command must have caused
them to look to those around them for a definition of the appropriate
response. It is particularly worth noting that they found two impressive
pieces of social evidence, each pointing in the same direction.
The first was the initial set of their compatriots, who quickly and
willingly took the poison drafts. There will always be a few such fanatically obedient individuals in any strong-leader-dominated group.
Whether, in this instance, they had been specially instructed beforehand
to serve as examples or whether they were just naturally the most
compliant with Jones’s wishes is difficult to know. No matter; the psychological effect of the actions of those individuals must have been
potent. If the suicides of similar others in news stories can influence
total strangers to kill themselves, imagine how enormously more compelling such an act would be when performed without hesitation by
one’s neighbors in a place like Jonestown.
The second source of social evidence came from the reactions of the
crowd itself. Given the conditions, I suspect that what occurred was a
large-scale instance of the pluralistic ignorance phenomenon that frequently infects onlookers at emergencies. Each Jonestowner looked to
the actions of surrounding individuals to assess the situation
and—finding seeming calm because everyone else, too, was surreptitiously assessing rather than reacting—“learned” that patient turn taking
was the correct behavior. Such misinterpreted but nonetheless convincing social evidence would be expected to result precisely in the ghastly

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 117
composure of the assemblage that waited in the tropics of Guyana for
businesslike death.
From my own perspective, most attempts to analyze the Jonestown
incident have focused too much on the personal qualities of Jim Jones.
Although he was without question a man of rare dynamism, the power
he wielded strikes me as coming less from his remarkable personal style
than from his understanding of fundamental psychological principles.
His real genius as a leader was his realization of the limitations of individual leadership. No leader can hope to persuade, regularly and singlehandedly, all the members of the group. A forceful leader can reasonably
expect, however, to persuade some sizable proportion of group members. Then the raw information that a substantial number of group
members has been convinced can, by itself, convince the rest. Thus the
most influential leaders are those who know how to arrange group
conditions to allow the principle of social proof to work maximally in
their favor.
It is in this that Jones appears to have been inspired. His masterstroke
was the decision to move the People’s Temple community from its roots
in urban San Francisco to the remoteness of equatorial South America,
where the conditions of uncertainty and exclusive similarity would
make the principle of social proof operate for him as perhaps nowhere
else. There, a settlement of a thousand people, much too large to be
held in persistent sway by the force of one man’s personality, could be
changed from a following into a herd. As slaughterhouse operators have
long known, the mentality of a herd makes it easy to manage. Simply
get some members moving in the desired direction and the others—responding not so much to the lead animal as to those immediately surrounding them—will peacefully and mechanically go along. The powers
of the amazing Reverend Jim Jones, then, are probably best understood
not in terms of his dramatic personal style, but in his profound knowledge of the art of social jujitsu.

HOW TO SAY NO
This chapter began with an account of the relatively harmless practice
of laugh tracking and has moved on to stories of murder and suicide—all
explained by the principle of social proof. How can we expect to defend
ourselves against a weapon of influence that pervades such a vast range
of behavior? The difficulty is compounded by the realization that most
of the time, we don’t want to guard against the information that social
proof provides. The evidence it offers about how we should act is usually valid and valuable. With it we can cruise confidently through a

118 / Influence
myriad of decisions without personally having to investigate the detailed
pros and cons of each.
In this sense, the principle of social proof equips us with a wonderful
kind of automatic-pilot device not unlike that aboard most aircraft.
Yet there are occasional but real problems with automatic pilots.
Those problems appear whenever the flight information locked into
the control mechanism is wrong. In these instances, we will be taken
off course. Depending on the size of the error, the consequences can be
severe. But, because the automatic pilot afforded by the principle of
social proof is more often an ally than an enemy, we can’t be expected
to want simply to disconnect it. Thus we are faced with a classic problem: how to make use of a piece of equipment that simultaneously benefits and imperils our welfare.
Fortunately, there is a way out of the dilemma. Because the disadvantages of automatic pilots arise principally when incorrect data have been
put into the control system, our best defense against these disadvantages
is to recognize when the data are in error. If we can become sensitive
to situations where the social-proof automatic pilot is working with
inaccurate information, we can disengage the mechanism and grasp
the controls when we need to.
There are two types of situation in which incorrect data cause the
principle of social proof to give us poor counsel. The first occurs when
the social evidence has been purposely falsified. Invariably these situations are manufactured by exploiters intent on creating the impression—reality be damned—that a multitude is performing the way the
exploiters want us to perform. The canned laughter of TV comedy
shows, which we have already discussed, is one variety of faked data
of this sort. But there is a great deal more; and much of the fakery is
strikingly obvious.
For instance, canned responses are not unique to the electronic media
or even to the electronic age. In fact, the heavy-handed exploitation of
the principle of social proof can be traced through the history of one of
our most venerable art forms: grand opera. This is the phenomenon
called claquing, said to have been begun in 1820 by a pair of Paris operahouse habitus named Sauton and Porcher. The men were more than
operagoers, though. They were businessmen whose product was applause.
Organizing under the title L’Assurance des Succs Dramatiques, they
leased themselves and their employees to singers and opera managers
who wished to be assured of an appreciative audience response. So effective were they in stimulating genuine audience reaction with their
rigged reactions that before long claques (usually consisting of a lead-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 119
er—chef de claque—and several individual claqueurs) had become an established and persistent tradition throughout the world of opera. As
music historian Robert Sabin notes, “By 1830 the claque was a full-bloom
institution, collecting by day, applauding by night, all in the honest
open…. But it is altogether probable that neither Sauton, nor his ally
Porcher, had a notion of the extent to which their scheme of paid applause would be adopted and applied wherever opera is sung.”15
As claquing grew and developed, its practitioners offered an array
of styles and strengths. In the same way that laugh-track producers can
hire individuals who excel in titters, chuckles, or belly laughs, the
claques spawned their own specialists—the pleureuse, chosen for her
ability to weep on cue; the bisseur, who called “bis” (repeat) and “encore”
in ecstatic tones; and in direct kinship with today’s laugh-track performer, the rieur, selected for the infectious quality of his laugh.
For our purposes, though, the most instructive parallel to modern
forms of canned response is the conspicuous character of the fakery.
No special need was seen to disguise or vary the claque, who often sat
in the same seats, performance after performance, year after year, led
by a chef de claque two decades into his position. Even the monetary
transactions were not hidden from the public. Indeed, one hundred
years after the birth of claquing, a reader of the London Musical Times
could scan the advertised rates of the Italian claqueurs. Whether in the
world of Rigoletto or Gilligan’s Island, then, audiences have been successfully manipulated by those who use social evidence, even when that
evidence has been openly falsified.
For applause on entrance, if a gentleman 25 lire
For applause on entrance, if a lady 15 lire
Ordinary applause during performance, each 10 lire
Insistent applause during performance, each 15 lire
Still more insistent applause 17 lire
For interruptions with “Bene!” or “Bravo!” 5 lire
For a “Bis” at any cost 50 lire
Wild enthusiasm—A special sum to be arranged
FIGURE 4-5
Advertised Rates of the Italian Claque
From “ordinary applause” to “wild enthusiasm,” claqueurs offered
their services in an audaciously public fashion—in this case, in a

120 / Influence
newspaper read by many of the audience members they fully expected
to influence. Claque, whirr.
What Sauton and Porcher realized about the mechanical way that
we abide by the principle of social proof is understood as well by a
variety of today’s exploiters. They see no need to hide the manufactured
nature of the social evidence they provide—witness the amateurish
quality of the average TV laugh track. They seem almost smug in the
recognition of our predicament: Either we must allow them to fool us
or we must abandon the precious automatic pilots that make us so
vulnerable to their tricks. But in their certainty that they have us trapped,
such exploiters have made a crucial mistake. The laxity with which they
construct phony social evidence gives us a way to fight back.
Because automatic pilots can be engaged and disengaged at will, we
can cruise along trusting in the course steered by the principle of social
proof until we recognize that a piece of inaccurate data is being used.
Then we can take the controls, make the necessary correction for the
misinformation, and reset the automatic pilot. The transparency of the
rigged social proof we get these days provides us with exactly the cue
we need for knowing when to perform this simple maneuver. With no
more cost than a bit of vigilance for plainly counterfeit social evidence,
then, we can protect ourselves nicely.
Let’s take an example. A bit earlier, we noted the proliferation of average-person-on-the-street ads, in which a number of ordinary people
speak glowingly of a product, often without knowing that their words
are being recorded. As would be expected according to the principle
of social proof, these testimonials from “average people like you and
me” make for quite effective advertising campaigns. They have always
included one relatively subtle kind of distortion: We hear only from
those who like the product; as a result, we get an understandably biased
picture of the amount of social support for it. More recently, though, a
cruder and more unethical sort of falsification has been introduced.
Commercial producers often don’t bother to get genuine testimonials.
They merely hire actors to play the roles of average people testifying
in an unrehearsed fashion to an interviewer. It is amazing how baldfaced these “unrehearsed interview” commercials can be. The situations
are obviously staged, the participants are clearly actors, and the dialogue
is unmistakably prewritten.
Dave Barry
Knight Ridder News Service
Recently I was watching TV, and a commercial came on, and the announcer, in a tone of voice usually reserved for major developments in

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 121
the Persian Gulf, said, “Now consumers can ask Angela Lansbury their
questions about Bufferin!”
As a normal human, the natural reaction to this announcement is:
“Huh?” Meaning: “What does Angela Lansbury have to do with Bufferin?” But this commercial featured several consumers who had apparently been stopped at random on the street, and every one of them had a
question for Angela Lansbury about Bufferin. Basically, what they asked
was, “Miss Lansbury, is Bufferin a good product that I should purchase,
or what?”
These consumers seemed very earnest. It was as if they had been
going around for months wringing their hands and saying, “I have a
question about Bufferin! If only I could ask Angela Lansbury!”
What we are seeing here is yet another example of a worsening
problem that has been swept under the rug for too long in this nation:
The invasion of Consumers From Mars. The look like humans, but they
don’t act like humans, and they are taking over.
FIGURE 4-6
Just Your Average Martian on the Street
Apparently I am not alone in noticing the number of blatantly phony
“unrehearsed”
testimonial ads these days. Humorist Dave Barry has registered their
prevalence too
and has labeled their inhabitants Consumers From Mars, which is a
term I like
and have even begun using myself. It helps remind me that, as regards
my buying
habits, I should be sure to ignore the tastes of these individuals who,
after all, come
from another planet than me.
(KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE)

I know that whenever I encounter an influence attempt of this sort,
it sets off in me a kind of alarm with a clear directive: Attention! Attention! Bad social proof in this situation. Temporarily disconnect automatic pilot.
It’s so easy to do. We need only make a conscious decision to be alert
to counterfeit social evidence, and the smug overconfidence of the exploiters will play directly into our hands. We can relax until their
manifest fakery is spotted, at which time we can pounce.
And we should pounce with a vengeance. I am speaking here of more
than simply ignoring the misinformation, although this defensive tactic
is certainly called for. I am speaking of aggressive counterattack.
Whenever possible we ought to sting those responsible for the rigging

122 / Influence
of social evidence. We should purchase no products featured in phony
“unrehearsed interview” commercials. Moreover, each manufacturer
of the items should receive a letter explaining our response and recommending that they discontinue use of the advertising agency that produced so deceptive a presentation of their product.
Of course, we don’t always want to trust the actions of others to direct
our conduct—especially in a situation important enough to warrant
our personal investigation of the pros and cons, or in which we are experts—but we do want to be able to count on others’ behavior as a
source of valid information in a large array of settings. If, in such settings, we find that we cannot trust the information to be valid because
someone has tampered with the evidence, we ought to be ready to strike
back. In such instances, I personally feel driven by more than the aversion to being duped. I bristle at the thought of being pushed into an
unacceptable corner by those who would undermine one of my hedges
against the decisional overload of modern life. And I get a genuine
sense of righteousness by lashing out when they try. If you are like me,
so should you.
In addition to the times when social evidence is deliberately faked,
there is another time when the principle of social proof will regularly
steer us wrong. In such an instance, an innocent, natural error will
produce snowballing social proof that pushes us to the incorrect decision. The pluralist ignorance phenomenon, in which everyone at an
emergency sees no cause for alarm, is one example of this process. The
best illustration I know, however, comes from a story of one of my
students, who was a highway patrolman.
After a class session in which the subject of discussion was the principle of social proof, he stayed to talk with me. He said that he now
understood the cause of a type of traffic accident that had always
puzzled him before. The accident typically occurred on the city freeway
during rush hour, when cars in all lanes were moving steadily but
slowly. Events leading to the accident would start when a pair of cars,
one behind the other, would simultaneously begin signaling an intention
to get out of the lane they were in and into the next. Within seconds, a
long line of drivers to the rear of the first two would follow suit,
thinking that something—a stalled car or a construction barrier—was
blocking the lane ahead. It would be in this crush to cram into the
available spaces of the next lane that a collision frequently happened.
The odd thing about it all, according to the patrolman, was that very
often there had been no obstruction to be avoided in the first place, and
by the time of the accident, this should have been obvious to anyone
who looked. He said he had more than once witnessed such accidents

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 123
when there was a visibly clear road in front of the ill-fated lane
switchers.
The patrolman’s account provides certain insights into the way we
respond to social proof. First, we seem to assume that if a lot of people
are doing the same thing, they must know something we don’t. Especially when we are uncertain, we are willing to place an enormous
amount of trust in the collective knowledge of the crowd. Second, quite
frequently the crowd is mistaken because they are not acting on the
basis of any superior information but are reacting, themselves, to the
principle of social proof.
So if a pair of freeway drivers decided by coincidence to change lanes
at the identical moment, the next two drivers might well do the same,
assuming that the forward drivers had spotted an obstruction. The
resulting social evidence confronting drivers behind this group would
be potent—four successive cars, all with their turn signals flashing,
trying to angle into the next lane. More signal lights would go on. The
social proof would be undeniable by then. For drivers to the rear, there
could be no question about the correctness of switching lanes: “All those
guys ahead must know something.” So intent would they be upon
working themselves into the next lane that, without even checking the
true condition of the road before them, the drivers would begin a linelong flank assault. Crash.
There is a lesson here: An automatic-pilot device, like social proof,
should never be trusted fully; even when no saboteur has fed bad information into the mechanism, it can sometimes go haywire by itself.
We need to check the machine from time to time to be sure that it hasn’t
worked itself out of sync with the other sources of evidence in the
situation—the objective facts, our prior experiences, our own judgments.
Fortunately, this precaution requires neither much effort nor much
time. A quick glance around is all that is needed. And this little precaution is well worth it. The consequences of single-minded reliance on
social evidence can be frightening.
This aspect of the social proof phenomenon always reminds me of
the way certain Indian tribes—the Blackfeet, Cree, Snake, and
Crow—used to hunt the North American buffalo. There are two features
of buffalo that make them especially susceptible to erroneous social
evidence. First, their eyes are set in their heads so that it is easier for
them to see to the side than to the front. Second, when they run, as in
a stampede, it is with their heads down low so they cannot see above
the herd. As a result, the Indians realized, it was possible to kill tremendous numbers of buffalo by starting a herd running toward a cliff. The
animals, responding to the thundering social proof around them—and
never looking up to see what lay ahead—did the rest. One astonished

124 / Influence
observer to such a hunt described the deadly outcome of the buffalo’s
obsessive trust in collective knowledge.
In this way, it was possible to decoy a herd toward a precipice, and
cause it to plunge over en masse, the leaders being thrust over by
their followers and all the rest following of their own free will.16
Certainly, a flier whose plane is locked onto automatic pilot would
be wise to glance occasionally at the instrument panel and out the
window. In the same way, we need to look up and around periodically
whenever we are locked onto the evidence of the crowd. Without this
simple safeguard against misguided social proof, our prospects might
well run parallel to those of the freeway lane switchers and the North
American buffalo: Crash.
READER’S REPORT

From a Former Racetrack Employee
“I became aware of one method of faking social evidence to one’s advantage while working at a racetrack. In order to lower the odds and
make more money, some bettors are able to sway the public to bet on
bad horses.
“Odds at a racetrack are based on where the money is being bet. The
more money on a horse, the lower (better) the odds. Many people who
play the horses have surprisingly little knowledge of racing or betting
strategy. Thus, especially when they don’t know much about the horses
in a particular race, a lot of times they’ll simply bet the favorite. Because
tote boards are displayed with up-to-the-minute odds, the public can
always tell who the current favorite is. The system that a high roller
can use to alter the odds is actually quite simple. The guy has in mind
a horse he feels has a good chance of winning. Next he chooses a horse
that has long odds (say, 15 to 1) and doesn’t have a realistic chance to
win. The minute the mutual windows open, the guy puts down a
hundred dollars on the inferior horse, creating an instant favorite whose
odds on the board drop to about 2 to 1.
“Now the elements of social proof begin to work. People who are
uncertain of how to bet the race look to the tote board to see which
horse the early bettors have decided is a favorite, and they follow. A
snowballing effect now occurs as other people continue to bet the favorite. At this point, the high roller can go back to the window and bet
heavily on his true favorite, which will have better odds now because
the ‘new favorite’ has pushed down the board. If the guy wins, the initial
hundred-dollar investment will have been worth it many times over.
“I’ve seen this happen myself. I remember one time a person put

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 125
down a hundred dollars on a prerace 10-to-1 shot, making it the early
favorite. The rumors started circulating around the track—people knew
something. Next thing you know, everyone (me included) was betting
on this horse. It ended up running last and had a bad leg. Many people
lost a lot of money. Somebody came out ahead though. We’ll never
know who. But he is the one with all the money. He understood the
theory of social proof.”
Once again we can see that social proof is most powerful for those who
feel unfamiliar or unsure in a specific situation and who, consequently,
must look outside of themselves for evidence of how best to behave
there.

Chapter 5
LIKING
The Friendly Thief
The main work of a trial attorney is to make a jury like his
client.
—CLARENCE DARROW

, we most
F prefer to say yes to the requests of someone we know and like.
What
EW PEOPLE WOULD BE SURPRISED TO LEARN THAT, AS A RULE

might be startling to note, however, is that this simple rule is used in
hundreds of ways by total strangers to get us to comply with their requests.
The clearest illustration I know of the professional exploitation of the
liking rule is the Tupperware party, which I consider the quintessential
American compliance setting. Anybody familiar with the workings of
a Tupperware party will recognize the use of the various weapons of
influence we have examined so far: reciprocity (to start, games are
played and prizes won by the partygoers; anyone who doesn’t win a
prize gets to reach into a grab bag for hers so that everyone has received
a gift before the buying begins), commitment (each participant is urged
to describe publicly the uses and benefits she has found in the Tupperware she already owns), and social proof (once the buying begins, each
purchase builds the idea that other, similar people want the product;
therefore, it must be good).
All the major weapons of influence are present to help things along,
but the real power of the Tupperware party comes from a particular
arrangement that trades on the liking rule. Despite the entertaining and
persuasive salesmanship of the Tupperware demonstrator, the true re-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 127
quest to purchase the product does not come from this stranger; it comes
from a friend to every woman in the room. Oh, the Tupperware representative may physically ask for each partygoer’s order, all right, but
the more psychologically compelling requester is a housewife sitting
off to the side, smiling, chatting, and serving refreshments. She is the
party hostess, who has called her friends together for the demonstration
in her home and who, everyone knows, makes a profit from each piece
sold at her party.
Simple. By providing the hostess with a percentage of the take, the
Tupperware Home Parties Corporation arranges for its customers to
buy from and for a friend rather than an unknown salesperson. In this
way, the attraction, the warmth, the security, and the obligation of
friendship are brought to bear on the sales setting. Consumer researchers
Frenzer and Davis, who have examined the social ties between the
hostess and the partygoers in home-party sales settings, have affirmed
the power of the company’s approach: The strength of that social bond
is twice as likely to determine product purchase as is preference for the
product itself. The results have been remarkable. It was recently estimated that Tupperware sales exceed $2.5 million a day!
What is interesting is that the customers appear to be fully aware of
the liking and friendship pressures embodied in the Tupperware party.
Some don’t seem to mind; others do, but don’t seem to know how to
avoid them. One woman I spoke with described her reactions with
more than a bit of frustration in her voice:
It’s gotten to the point now where I hate to be invited to Tupperware parties. I’ve got all the containers I need; and if I wanted any
more, I could buy another brand cheaper in the store. But when
a friend calls up, I feel like I have to go. And when I get there, I
feel like I have to buy something. What can I do? It’s for one of
my friends.
With so irresistible an ally as the friendship principle operating, it is
little wonder that the company has abandoned retail sales outlets and
has pushed the home party concept until a Tupperware party now
starts somewhere every 2.7 seconds. But, of course, all sorts of other
compliance professionals recognize the pressure to say yes to someone
we know and like. Take, for instance, the growing number of charity
organizations that recruit volunteers to canvass for donations close to
their own homes. They understand perfectly how much more difficult
it is for us to turn down a charity request when it comes from a friend
or a neighbor.
Other compliance professionals have found that the friend doesn’t
even have to be present to be effective; often, just the mention of the

128 / Influence
friend’s name is enough. The Shaklee Corporation, which specializes
in door-to-door sales of various home-related products, advises its
salespeople to use the “endless chain” method for finding new customers. Once a customer admits to liking a product, he or she can be pressed
for the names of friends who would also appreciate learning about it.
The individuals on that list can then be approached for sales and a list
of their friends, who can serve as sources for still other potential customers, and so on in an endless chain.
The key to the success of this method is that each new prospect is
visited by a salesperson armed with the name of a friend “who suggested I call on you.” Turning the salesperson away under those circumstances is difficult; it’s almost like rejecting the friend. The Shaklee sales
manual insists that employees use this system without fail: “It would
be impossible to overestimate its value. Phoning or calling on a prospect
and being able to say that Mr. So-and-so, a friend of his, felt he would
benefit by giving you a few moments of his time is virtually as good as
a sale 50 percent made before you enter.”
The widespread use by compliance practitioners of the liking bond
between friends tells us much about the power of the liking rule to
produce assent. In fact, we find that such professionals seek to benefit
from the rule even when already formed friendships are not present
for them to employ. Under these circumstances, the professionals’
compliance strategy is quite direct: They first get us to like them.
There is a man in Detroit, Joe Girard, who specialized in using the
liking rule to sell Chevrolets. He became wealthy in the process, making
more than two hundred thousand dollars a year. With such a salary,
we might guess that he was a high-level GM executive or perhaps the
owner of a Chevrolet dealership. But no. He made his money as a
salesman on the showroom floor. At what he did, he was phenomenal.
For twelve years straight, he won the title as the “number one car
salesman”; he averaged more than five cars and trucks sold every day
he worked; and he has been called the world’s “greatest car salesman”
by the Guinness Book of World Records.
For all his success, the formula he employed was surprisingly simple.
It consisted of offering people just two things: a fair price and someone
they liked to buy from. “And that’s it,” he claimed in an interview.
“Finding the salesman they like, plus the price; put them both together,
and you get a deal.”
Fine. The Joe Girard formula tells us how vital the liking rule is to
his business, but it doesn’t tell us nearly enough. For one thing, it doesn’t
tell us why customers liked him more than some other salesperson who
offered a fair price. There is a crucial—and fascinating—general question

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 129
that Joe’s formula leaves unanswered: What are the factors that cause
one person to like another person? If we knew that answer, we would
be a long way toward understanding how people such as Joe can so
successfully arrange to have us like them and, conversely, how we
might successfully arrange to have others like us. Fortunately, social
scientists have been asking the question for decades. Their accumulated
evidence has allowed them to identify a number of factors that reliably
cause liking. And, as we will see, each is cleverly used by compliance
professionals to urge us along the road to “yes.”

Physical Attractiveness
Although it is generally acknowledged that good-looking people have
an advantage in social interaction, recent findings indicate that we may
have sorely underestimated the size and reach of that advantage. There
seems to be a click, whirr response to attractive people. Like all click,
whirr reactions, it happens automatically, without forethought. The response itself falls into a category that social scientists call “halo effects.”
A halo effect occurs when one positive characteristic of a person dominates the way that person is viewed by others. And the evidence is
now clear that physical attractiveness is often such a characteristic.
Research has shown that we automatically assign to good-looking
individuals such favorable traits as talent, kindness, honesty, and intelligence. Furthermore, we make these judgments without being aware
that physical attractiveness plays a role in the process. Certain of the
consequences of this unconscious assumption that “good-looking equals
good” scare me. For example, a study of the Canadian federal elections
found that attractive candidates received more than two and a half
times as many votes as unattractive candidates.1 Despite such evidence
of favoritism toward handsome politicians, follow-up research demonstrated that voters do not realize their bias. In fact, 73 percent of Canadian voters surveyed denied in the strongest possible terms that their
votes had been influenced by physical appearance; only 14 percent even
allowed for the possibility of such influence. A similar effect has been
found in hiring situations. In one study, good grooming of applicants
in a simulated employment interview accounted for more favorable
hiring decisions than did job qualifications—this, even though the interviewers claimed that appearance played a small role in their choices.2
Equally unsettling research indicates that our judicial process is
similarly susceptible to the influences of body dimensions and bone
structure. Good-looking people are likely to receive highly favorable
treatment in the legal system. For example, in a Pennsylvania study,
researchers rated the physical attractiveness of seventy-four separate

130 / Influence
male defendants at the start of their criminal trials. When, much later,
the researchers checked court records for the results of these cases, they
found that the handsome men had received significantly lighter sentences. In fact, the attractive defendants were twice as likely to avoid
jail as the unattractive ones.3 In another study—this one on the damages
awarded in a staged negligence trial—a defendant who was betterlooking than his victim was assessed an average amount of $5,623; but
when the victim was the more attractive of the two, the average compensation was $10,051. What’s more, both male and female jurors exhibited the attractiveness-based favoritism.
Other experiments have demonstrated that attractive people are more
likely to obtain help when in need and are more persuasive in changing
the opinions of an audience. Here, too, both sexes respond in the same
way. In the helping study, for instance, the better-looking men and
women received aid more often, even from members of their own sex.4
A major exception to this rule might be expected to occur, of course, if
the attractive person is viewed as a direct competitor, especially a romantic rival. Short of this qualification, though, it is apparent that goodlooking people enjoy an enormous social advantage in our culture. They
are better liked, more persuasive, more frequently helped, and seen as
possessing better personality traits and intellectual capacities. And it
appears that the social benefits of good looks begin to accumulate quite
early. Research on elementary-school children shows that adults view
aggressive acts as less naughty when performed by an attractive child
and that teachers presume good-looking children to be more intelligent
than their less-attractive classmates.5
It is hardly any wonder, then, that the halo of physical attractiveness
is regularly exploited by compliance professionals. Because we like attractive people and because we tend to comply with those we like, it
makes sense that sales training programs include grooming hints, that
fashionable clothiers select their floor staffs from among the goodlooking candidates, and that con men are handsome and con women
pretty.

Similarity
But what if physical appearance is not much at issue? After all, most
people possess average looks. Are there other factors that can be used
to produce liking? As both researchers and compliance professionals
know, there are several, and one of the most influential is similarity.
We like people who are similar to us. This fact seems to hold true
whether the similarity is in the area of opinions, personality traits,
background, or life-style. Consequently, those who wish to be liked in

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 131
order to increase our compliance can accomplish that purpose by appearing similar to us in any of a wide variety of ways.
Dress is a good example. Several studies have demonstrated that we
are more likely to help those who dress like us. In one study, done in
the early 1970s when young people tended to dress either in “hippie”
or “straight” fashion, experimenters donned hippie or straight attire
and asked college students on campus for a dime to make a phone call.
When the experimenter was dressed in the same way as the student,
the request was granted in more than two thirds of the instances; but
when the student and requester were dissimilarly dressed, the dime
was provided less than half the time. Another experiment shows how
automatic our positive response to similar others can be. Marchers in
an antiwar demonstration were found to be not only more likely to sign
the petition of a similarly dressed requester, but also to do so without
bothering to read it first. Click, whirr.6
Another way requesters can manipulate similarity to increase liking
and compliance is to claim that they have backgrounds and interests
similar to ours. Car salesmen, for example, are trained to look for
evidence of such things while examining the customer’s trade-in. If
there is camping gear in the trunk, the salesman might mention, later
on, how he loves to get away from the city whenever he can; if there
are golf balls on the back seat, he might remark that he hopes the rain
will hold off until he can play the eighteen holes he has scheduled for
later in the day; if he notices that the car was purchased out of state, he
might ask where the customer is from and report—with surprise—that
he (or his wife) was born there, too.
As trivial as these similarities may seem, they appear to work. One
researcher who examined the sales records of insurance companies
found that customers were more likely to buy insurance when the
salesperson was like them in such areas as age, religion, politics, and
cigarette-smoking habits. Because even small similarities can be effective
in producing a positive response to another and because a veneer of
similarity can be so easily manufactured, I would advise special caution
in the presence of requesters who claim to be “just like you.” Indeed,
it would be wise these days to be careful around salespeople who just
seem to be just like you. Many sales training programs now urge trainees
to “mirror and match” the customer’s body posture, mood, and verbal
style, as similarities along each of these dimensions have been shown
to lead to positive results.7

Compliments
Actor McLean Stevenson once described how his wife tricked him into

132 / Influence
marriage: “She said she liked me.” Although designed for a laugh, the
remark is as much instructive as humorous. The information that
someone fancies us can be a bewitchingly effective device for producing
return liking and willing compliance. So, often in terms of flattery or
simple claims of affinity, we hear positive estimation from people who
want something from us.
Remember Joe Girard, the world’s “greatest car salesman,” who says
the secret of his success was getting customers to like him? He did
something that, on the face of it, seems foolish and costly. Each month
he sent every one of his more than thirteen thousand former customers
a holiday greeting card containing a personal message. The holiday
greeting changed from month to month (Happy New Year or Happy
Thanksgiving, etc.), but the message printed on the face of the card
never varied. It read, “I like you.” As Joe explained it, “There’s nothing
else on the card. Nothin’ but my name. I’m just telling ’em that I like
’em.”
“I like you.” It came in the mail every year, twelve times a year, like
clockwork. “I like you,” on a printed card that went off to thirteen
thousand other people, too. Could a statement of liking so impersonal,
so obviously designed to sell cars, really work? Joe Girard thinks so;
and a man as successful as he was at what he did deserves our attention.
Joe understands an important fact about human nature: We are phenomenal suckers for flattery. Although there are limits to our gullibility—especially when we can be sure that the flatterer is trying to manipulate us—we tend, as a rule, to believe praise and to like those who
provide it, oftentimes when it is clearly false.
An experiment done on men in North Carolina shows how helpless
we can be in the face of praise. The men in the study received comments
about themselves from another person who needed a favor from them.
Some of the men got only positive comments, some got only negative
comments, and some got a mixture of good and bad. There were three
interesting findings. First, the evaluator who provided only praise was
liked best by the men. Second, this was the case even though the men
fully realized that the flatterer stood to gain from their liking him. Finally, unlike the other types of comments, pure praise did not have to
be accurate to work. Positive comments produced just as much liking
for the flatterer when they were untrue as when they were true.8
Apparently we have such an automatically positive reaction to compliments that we can fall victim to someone who uses them in an obvious
attempt to win our favor. Click, whirr. When seen in this light, the expense of printing and mailing well over 150,000 “I like you” cards each
year seems neither as foolish nor as costly as before.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 133

Contact and Cooperation
For the most part, we like things that are familiar to us.9 To prove the
point to yourself, try a little experiment. Get the negative of an old
photograph that shows a front view of your face and have it developed
into a pair of pictures—one that shows you as you actually look and
one that shows a reverse image (so that the right and left sides of your
face are interchanged). Now decide which version of your face you like
better and ask a good friend to make the choice, too. If you are at all
like a group of Milwaukee women on whom this procedure was tried,
you should notice something odd: Your friend will prefer the true print,
but you will prefer the reverse image. Why? Because you both will be
responding favorably to the more familiar face—your friend to the one
the world sees, and you to the transposed one you find in the mirror
every day.10
Because of its effect on liking, familiarity plays a role in decisions
about all sorts of things, including the politicians we elect. It appears
that in an election booth voters often choose a candidate merely because
the name seems familiar. In one controversial Ohio election a few years
ago, a man given little chance of winning the state attorney-general race
swept to victory when, shortly before the election, he changed his name
to Brown—a family name of much Ohio political tradition.11
How could such a thing happen? The answer lies partially in the
unconscious way that familiarity affects liking. Often we don’t realize
that our attitude toward something has been influenced by the number
of times we have been exposed to it in the past. For example, in one
experiment, the faces of several individuals were flashed on a screen
so quickly that later on, the subjects who were exposed to the faces in
this manner couldn’t recall having seen any of them before. Yet, the
more frequently a person’s face was flashed on the screen, the more
these subjects came to like that person when they met in a subsequent
interaction. And because greater liking leads to greater social influence,
these subjects were also more persuaded by the opinion statements of
the individuals whose faces had appeared on the screen most frequently.12
On the basis of evidence that we are more favorable toward the things
we have had contact with, some people have recommended a “contact”
approach to improving race relations. They argue that simply by
providing individuals of different ethnic background with more exposure to one another as equals, those individuals will naturally come to
like each other better. However, when scientists have examined school

134 / Influence
integration—the area offering the single best test of the contact approach—they have discovered quite the opposite pattern. School desegregation is more likely to increase prejudice between blacks and whites
than to decrease it.13
Let’s stay with the issue of school desegregation for a while. However
well intentioned the proponents of interracial harmony through simple
contact, their approach is unlikely to bear fruit because the argument
on which it is based is terribly misinformed. First of all, the school setting
is no melting pot where children interact as readily with members of
other ethnic groups as they do with their own. Years after formal school
integration, there is little social integration. The students clot together
ethnically, separating themselves for the most part from other groups.
Second, even if there were much more interethnic interaction, research
shows that becoming familiar with something through repeated contact
doesn’t necessarily cause greater liking. In fact, continued exposure to
a person or object under unpleasant conditions such as frustration,
conflict, or competition leads to less liking.14 And the typical American
classroom fosters precisely these unpleasant conditions.
Consider the illuminating report of a psychologist, Elliot Aronson,
called in to consult with school authorities on problems in the Austin,
Texas, schools. His description of how he found education proceeding
in the standard classroom could apply to nearly any public school in
the United States:
In general, here is how it works: The teacher stands in front of the
class and asks a question. Six to ten children strain in their seats
and wave their hands in the teacher’s face, eager to be called on
and show how smart they are. Several others sit quietly with eyes
averted, trying to become invisible, When the teacher calls on one
child, you see looks of disappointment and dismay on the faces
of the eager students, who missed a chance to get the teacher’s
approval; and you will see relief on the faces of the others who
didn’t know the answer…. This game is fiercely competitive and
the stakes are high, because the kids are competing for the love
and approval of one of the two or three most important people in
their world.
Further, this teaching process guarantees that the children will
not learn to like and understand each other. Conjure up your own
experience. If you knew the right answer and the teacher called
on someone else, you probably hoped that he or she would make
a mistake so that you would have a chance to display your
knowledge. If you were called on and failed, or if you didn’t even
raise your hand to compete, you probably envied and resented

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 135
your classmates who knew the answer. Children who fail in this
system become jealous and resentful of the successes, putting them
down as teacher’s pets or even resorting to violence against them
in the school yard. The successful students, for their part, often
hold the unsuccessful children in contempt, calling them “dumb”
or “stupid.”
This competitive process does not encourage anyone to look
benevolently and happily upon his fellow students.15
Should we wonder, then, why raw school desegregation—whether
by enforced busing, district rezoning, or school closures—so frequently
produces increased rather than decreased prejudice? When our own
children find their pleasant social and friendship contacts within their
own ethnic boundaries and get repeated exposure to other groups only
in the competitive cauldron of the classroom, we might expect as much.
Are there available solutions to this problem? One possibility might
be to end our attempts at school integration. But that hardly seems
workable. Even were we to ignore the inevitable legal and constitutional
challenges and the disruptive societal wrangle such a retreat would
provoke, there are solid reasons for pursuing classroom integration.
For instance, although white students’ achievement levels remain steady,
it is ten times more likely that the academic performance of minority
students will significantly increase rather than significantly decline
after desegregation. We must be cautious in our approach to school
desegregation not to throw out the baby because it is sitting in some
dirty bath water.
The idea, of course, is to jettison just the water, leaving the baby
shining from the bath. Right now, though, our baby is soaking in the
schmutzwasser of increased racial hostility. Fortunately, real hope for
draining away that hostility is emerging from the research of education
specialists into the concept of “cooperative learning.” Because much of
the heightened prejudice from classroom desegregation seems to stem
from increased exposure to outside group members as rivals, these
educators have experimented with forms of learning in which cooperation rather than competition with classmates is central.
Off to camp. To understand the logic of the cooperative approach, it
helps to reexamine the fascinating, three-decades-old research program
of Turkish-born social scientist Muzafer Sherif. Intrigued with the issue
of intergroup conflict, Sherif decided to investigate the process as it
developed in boys’ summer camps. Although the boys never realized
that they were participants in an experiment, Sherif and his associates
consistently engaged in artful manipulations of the camp’s social environment to observe the effects on group relations.

136 / Influence
It didn’t take much to bring on certain kinds of ill will. Simply separating the boys into two residence cabins was enough to stimulate a “we
vs. they” feeling between the groups; and assigning names to the two
groups (the Eagles and the Rattlers) accelerated the sense of rivalry.
The boys soon began to demean the qualities and accomplishments of
the other group. But these forms of hostility were minor compared to
what occurred when the experimenters purposely introduced competitive activities into the factions’ meetings with one another. Cabin against
cabin treasure hunts, tugs-of-war, and athletic contests produced namecalling and physical friction. During the competitions, members of the
opposing team were labeled “cheaters,” “sneaks,” and “stinkers.” Afterward, cabins were raided, rival banners were stolen and burned,
threatening signs were posted, and lunchroom scuffles were commonplace.
At this point, it was evident to Sherif that the recipe for disharmony
was quick and easy: Just separate the participants into groups and let
sit for a while in their own juices. Then mix together over the flame of
continued competition. And there you have it: Cross-group hatred at
a rolling boil.
A more challenging issue then faced the experimenters: how to remove the entrenched hostility they had created. They first tried the
contact approach of bringing the bands together more often. But even
when the joint activities were pleasant ones, such as movies and social
events, the results were disastrous. Picnics produced food fights, entertainment programs gave way to shouting contests, dining-hall lines
degenerated into shoving matches. Sherif and his research team began
to worry that in Dr. Frankenstein fashion, they might have created a
monster they could no longer control. Then, at the height of the strife,
they hit on a resolution that was at once simple and effective.
They constructed a series of situations in which competition between
the groups would have harmed everyone’s interests, in which cooperation was necessary for mutual benefit. On a daylong outing, the single
truck available to go into town for food was “found” to be stuck. The
boys were assembled and all pulled and pushed together until the
vehicle was on its way. In another instance, the researchers arranged
for an interruption of the camp’s water supply, which came through
pipes from a distant tank. Presented with the common crisis and realizing the need for unified action, the boys organized themselves harmoniously to find and fix the problem before day’s end. In yet another
circumstance requiring cooperation, the campers were informed that
a desirable movie was available for rental but that the camp could not
afford it. Aware that the only solution was to combine resources, the

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 137
boys rented the film with pooled money and spent an unusually congenial evening enjoying it together.
The consequences, though not instantaneous, were nonetheless
striking. Conjoint efforts toward common goals steadily bridged the
rancorous rift between the groups. Before long, the verbal baiting had
died, the jostling in lines had ended, and the boys had begun to intermix
at the meal tables. Further, when asked to list their best friends, significant numbers changed from an earlier exclusive naming of in-group
chums to a listing that included boys in the other group. Some even
thanked the researchers for the opportunity to rate their friends again
because they realized they had changed their minds since the old days.
In one revealing episode, the boys were returning from a campfire on
a single bus—something that would have produced bedlam before but
was now specifically requested by the boys. When the bus stopped at
a refreshment stand, the boys of one group, with five dollars left in its
treasury, decided to treat their former bitter adversaries to milkshakes!
We can trace the roots of this surprising turnabout to those times
when the boys had to view one another as allies instead of opponents.
The crucial procedure was the experimenters’ imposition of common
goals on the groups. It was the cooperation required to achieve these
goals that finally allowed the rival group members to experience one
another as reasonable fellows, valued helpers, and friends. And when
success resulted from the mutual efforts, it became especially difficult
to maintain feelings of hostility toward those who had been teammates
in the triumph.16
Back to school. In the welter of racial tensions that followed school
desegregation, certain educational psychologists began to see the relevance to the classroom in Sherif’s findings. If only the learning experience
there could be modified to include at least occasional interethnic cooperation toward mutual successes, perhaps cross-group friendships would
have a place to grow. Although similar projects have been under way
in various states, an especially interesting approach in this direction—termed the “jigsaw classroom”—was developed by Elliot Aronson
and his colleagues in Texas and California.
The essence of the jigsaw route to learning is to require that students
work together to master the material scheduled for an upcoming examination. This is accomplished by forming students into cooperating
teams and giving each student only one part of the information—one
piece of the puzzle—necessary to pass the test. Under this system the
students must take turns teaching and helping one another. Everyone
needs everyone else to do well. Like Sherif’s campers working on tasks
that could be successfully accomplished only conjointly, the students
became allies rather than enemies.

138 / Influence
When tried in recently desegregated classrooms, the jigsaw approach
has generated impressive results. Studies have shown that, compared
to other classrooms in the same school using the traditional competitive
method, jigsaw learning stimulated significantly more friendship and
less prejudice between ethnic groups. Besides this vital reduction in
hostility, there were other advantages: Self-esteem, liking for school,
and test scores improved for minority students. And the white students
benefited, too. Their self-esteem and liking for school went up, and
their test performance was at least as high as that of whites in the traditional classes.
Gains such as these cry out for more detailed explanation. What exactly goes on in the jigsaw classroom to account for effects we had long
ago lost hope of attaining in the public schools? A case study provided
by Aronson helps us to understand better. It relates the experience of
Carlos, a young Mexican-American boy, who found himself in a jigsaw
group for the first time. Carlos’s job was to learn and then convey to
his team information on the middle years of Joseph Pulitzer. A test on
the famous newspaperman’s life would soon face each group member.
Aronson tells what happened:
Carlos was not very articulate in English, his second language,
and because he was often ridiculed when he had spoken up in the
past, he had learned over the years to keep quiet in class. We might
even say that Carlos and the teacher had entered into a conspiracy
of silence. He would become anonymous, buried in the bustle of
classroom activity, and not be embarrassed by having to stumble
over answers; she, in turn, would not call on him. Her decision
probably came from the purest of motives; she didn’t want to humiliate him, or watch the other kids make fun of him. But by ignoring Carlos, the teacher had, in effect, written him off. She was
implying that he was not worth bothering with; at least that was
the message the other kids got. If the teacher wasn’t calling on
Carlos, it must be because Carlos is stupid. It is likely that Carlos
himself came to the same conclusion.
Naturally, Carlos was quite uncomfortable with the new system,
which required him to talk to his groupmates; he had a great deal
of trouble communicating his paragraph. He stammered, hesitated,
and fidgeted. The other kids were not helpful at all; they reacted
out of their old, overlearned habit. When a kid stumbles, especially
one they think is stupid, they resort to ridicule and teasing. “Aw,
you don’t know it,” accused Mary. “You’re dumb; you’re stupid.
You don’t know what you’re doing.”

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 139
One of us, assigned to observe the group process, would intervene with a bit of advice when she overheard such comments:
“Okay, you can tease him if you want to,” she said, “and that
might be fun for you, but it’s not going to help you learn about
Joseph Pulitzer’s middle years. The exam will take place in about
an hour.” Notice how she changed the reinforcement contingencies.
Now Mary doesn’t gain much from putting Carlos down, and she
stands to lose a great deal. After a few days and several such experiences, it began to dawn on these kids that the only chance they
had to learn about Carlos’s segment was by paying attention to
what Carlos had to say.
And with that realization, the kids began to develop into pretty
good interviewers, sort of junior Dick Cavetts. Instead of teasing
Carlos or ignoring him, they learned to draw him out, to ask the
questions that made it easier for him to explain out loud what was
in his head. Carlos, in turn, relaxed more, and this improved his
ability to communicate. After a couple of weeks, the children
concluded that Carlos wasn’t nearly as dumb as they thought he
was. They saw things in him they hadn’t seen before. They began
to like him more, and Carlos began to enjoy school more and think
of his Anglo classmates not as tormentors but as friends.17
There is a tendency when faced with positive results like those from
the jigsaw classroom to become overly enthusiastic about a single,
simple solution to a tenacious problem. Experience should tell us that
such problems rarely yield to a simple remedy. That is no doubt true
in this case, as well. Even within the boundaries of cooperative learning
procedures, the issues are complex. Before we can feel truly comfortable
with the jigsaw, or any similar approach to learning and liking, much
more research is needed to determine how frequently, in what size
doses, at which ages, and in which sorts of groups cooperative strategies
will work. We also need to know the best way for teachers to institute
new methods—provided they will institute them at all. After all, not
only are cooperative learning techniques a radical departure from the
traditional, familiar routine of most teachers, they may also threaten
the teacher’s sense of importance in the classroom by turning over much
of the instruction to the students. Finally, we must realize that competition has its place, too. It can serve as a valuable motivator of desirable
action and an important builder of self-concept. The task, then, is not
to eliminate academic competition but to break its monopoly in the
classroom by introducing regular cooperative successes that include
members of all ethnic groups.18
Despite these qualifications, I cannot help but be encouraged by the

140 / Influence
evidence to date. When I talk to my students, or even my neighbors
and friends, about the prospects for cooperative learning approaches,
I can feel optimism rise in me. The public schools have for so long been
the source of discouraging news—sinking test scores, teacher burnout,
increasing crime, and, of course, racial conflict. Now there is at least
one crack in the gloom, and I find myself genuinely excited about it.
What’s the point of this digression into the effects of school desegregation on race relations? The point is to make two points. First, although
the familiarity produced by contact usually leads to greater liking, the
opposite occurs if the contact carries distasteful experiences with it.
Therefore, when children of different racial groups are thrown into the
incessant, harsh competition of the standard American classroom, we
ought to see—and we do see—the worsening of hostilities. Second, the
evidence that team-oriented learning is an antidote to this disorder may
tell us about the heavy impact of cooperation on the liking process.
But before we assume that cooperation is a powerful cause of liking,
we should first pass it through what, to my mind, is the acid test: Do
compliance practitioners systematically use cooperation to get us to
like them so we will say yes to their requests? Do they point it out when
it exists naturally in a situation? Do they try to amplify it when it exists
only weakly? And, most instructive of all, do they manufacture it when
it is absent?
As it turns out, cooperation passes the test with colors flying. Compliance professionals are forever attempting to establish that we and
they are working for the same goals, that we must “pull together” for
mutual benefit, that they are, in essence, our teammates. A host of examples is possible. Most are familiar, like the new-car salesman who
takes our side and “does battle” with his boss to secure us a good deal.19
But one rather spectacular illustration occurs in a setting few of us
would recognize firsthand, because the professionals are police interrogators whose job is to induce suspects to confess to crime.
In recent years, the courts have imposed a variety of restrictions on
the way police must behave in handling suspected criminals, especially
in seeking confessions. Many procedures that in the past led to admissions of guilt can no longer be employed for fear that they will result
in a judge’s dismissal of the case. As yet, however, the courts have found
nothing illegal in the use by the police of subtle psychology. For this
reason, criminal interrogations have taken increasingly to the use of
such ploys as the one they call Good Cop/Bad Cop.
Good Cop/Bad Cop works as follows: A young robbery suspect, let’s
say, who has been advised of his rights and is maintaining his innocence,
is brought to a room to be questioned by a pair of officers. One of the

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 141
officers, either because the part suits him or because it is merely his
turn, plays the role of Bad Cop. Before the suspect even sits down, Bad
Cop curses “the son of a bitch” for the robbery. For the rest of the session
his words come only with snarls and growls. He kicks the prisoner’s
chair to emphasize his points. When he looks at the man, he seems to
see a mound of garbage. If the suspect challenges Bad Cop’s accusations
or just refuses to answer them, Bad Cop becomes livid. His rage soars.
He swears he will do everything possible to assure a maximum sentence.
He says he has friends in the district attorney’s office who will hear
from him of the suspect’s noncooperative attitude and who will prosecute the case hard.
At the outset of Bad Cop’s performance, his partner, Good Cop, sits
in the background. Then, slowly, he starts to chip in. First he speaks
only to Bad Cop, trying to temper the burgeoning anger. “Calm down,
Frank, calm down.” But Bad Cop shouts back, “Don’t tell me to calm
down when he’s lying right to my face! I hate these lying bastards!” A
bit later, Good Cop actually says something in the suspect’s behalf.
“Take it easy, Frank, he’s only a kid.” Not much in the way of support,
but compared to the rantings of Bad Cop, the words fall like music on
the prisoner’s ears. Still, Bad Cop is unconvinced. “Kid? He’s no kid.
He’s a punk. That’s what he is, a punk. And I’ll tell you something else.
He’s over eighteen, and that’s all I need to get his ass sent so far behind
bars they’ll need a flashlight to find him.”
Now Good Cop begins to speak directly to the young man, calling
him by his first name and pointing out any positive details of the case.
“I’ll tell you, Kenny, you’re lucky that nobody was hurt and you weren’t
armed. When you come up for sentencing, that’ll look good.” If the
suspect persists in claiming innocence, Bad Cop launches into another
tirade of curses and threats. But this time Good Cop stops him, “Okay,
Frank,” handing Bad Cop some money, “I think we could all use some
coffee. How about getting us three cups?” When Bad Cop is gone, it’s
time for Good Cop’s big scene: “Look, man, I don’t know why, but my
partner doesn’t like you, and he’s gonna try to get you. And he’s gonna
be able to do it because we’ve got enough evidence right now. And he’s
right about the D.A.’s office going hard on guys who don’t cooperate.
You’re looking at five years, man, five years! Now, I don’t want to see
that happen to you. So if you admit you robbed that place right now,
before he gets back, I’ll take charge of your case and put in a good word
for you to the D.A. If we work together on this, we can cut that five
years down to two, maybe one. Do us both a favor, Kenny. Just tell me
how you did it, and then let’s start working on getting you through
this.” A full confession frequently follows.
Good Cop/Bad Cop works as well as it does for several reasons: The

142 / Influence
fear of long incarceration is quickly instilled by Bad Cop’s threats; the
perceptual contrast principle ensures that compared to the raving,
venomous Bad Cop, the interrogator playing Good Cop will seem like
an especially reasonable and kind man; and because Good Cop has intervened repeatedly on the suspect’s behalf—has even spent his own
money for a cup of coffee—the reciprocity rule pressures for a return
favor. The big reason that the technique is effective, though, is that it
gives the suspect the idea that there is someone on his side, someone
with his welfare in mind, someone working together with him, for him.
In most situations, such a person would be viewed very favorably, but
in the deep trouble our robbery suspect finds himself, that person takes
on the character of a savior. And from savior, it is but a short step to
trusted father confessor.

Conditioning and Association
“Why do they blame me, Doc?” It was the shaky telephone voice of a
local TV weatherman. He had been given my number when he called
the psychology department at my university to find someone who could
answer his question—a question that had always puzzled him but had
recently begun to bother and depress him.
“I mean, it’s crazy, isn’t it? Everybody knows that I just report the
weather, that I don’t order it, right? So how come I get so much flak
when the weather’s bad? During the floods last year, I got hate mail!
One guy threatened to shoot me if it didn’t stop raining. Christ, I’m still
looking over my shoulder from that one. And the people I work with
at the station do it, too! Sometimes, right on the air, they’ll zing me
about a heat wave or something. They have to know that I’m not responsible, but that doesn’t seem to stop them. Can you help me understand this, Doc? It’s really getting me down.”
We made an appointment to talk in my office, where I tried to explain
that he was the victim of an age-old click, whirr response that people
have to things they perceive as merely connected to one another. Instances of this response abound in modern life. But I felt that the example most likely to help the distressed weatherman would require a
bit of ancient history. I asked him to consider the precarious fate of the
imperial messengers of old Persia. Any such messenger assigned the
role of military courier had special cause to hope mightily for Persian
battlefield successes. With news of victory in his pouch, he would be
treated as a hero upon his arrival at the palace. The food, drink, and
women of his choice were provided gladly and sumptuously. Should
his message tell of military disaster, though, the reception would be
quite different: He was summarily slain.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 143
I hoped that the point of this story would not be lost on the
weatherman. I wanted him to be aware of a fact that is as true today as
it was in the time of ancient Persia, or, for that matter, in the time of
Shakespeare, who captured the essence of it with one vivid line. “The
nature of bad news,” he said, “infects the teller.” There is a natural human tendency to dislike a person who brings us unpleas-ant information, even when that person did not cause the bad news. The simple
association with it is enough to stimulate our dislike.20
But there was something else I hoped the weatherman would get
from the historical examples. Not only was he joined in his predicament
by centuries of other “tellers,” but also, compared to some, such as the
Persian messengers, he was very well-off. At the end of our session, he
said something to convince me that he appreciated this point quite
clearly. “Doc,” he said on his way out, “I feel a lot better about my job
now. I mean, I’m in Phoenix where the sun shines three hundred days
a year, right? Thank God I don’t do the weather in Buffalo.”
The weatherman’s parting comment reveals that he understood more
than I had told him about the principle that was influencing his viewers’
liking for him. Being connected with bad weather does have a negative
effect. But on the other side of the coin, being connected with sunshine
should do wonders for his popularity. And he was right. The principle
of association is a general one, governing both negative and positive
connections. An innocent association with either bad things or good
things will influence how people feel about us.21

Weathermen pay price
for nature’s curve balls
By David L. Langford
Associated Press
Television weather forecasters make a good living talking about the
weather, but when Mother Nature throws a curve ball, they duck for cover.
Conversations with several veteran prognosticators across the country this week
turned up stories of them being whacked by old ladies with umbrellas, accosted
by drunks in bars, pelted with snowballs and galoshes, threatened with death, and
accused of trying to play God.
“I had one guy call and tell me that if it snowed over Christmas, I wouldn’t live
to see New Year’s,” said Bob Gregory, who has been the forecaster at WTHR-TV
in Indianapolis for nine years.
Most of the forecasters claimed they are accurate 80 percent to 90 percent of the
time on one-day forecasts, but longer-range predictions get tricky. And most conceded they are simply reporting information supplied by computers and anonymous
meterologists from the National Weather Service or a private agency.

144 / Influence
But it’s the face on the television screen that people go after.
Tom Bonner, 35, who has been with KARK-TV in Little Rock, Ark., for 11 years,
remembers the time a burly farmer from Lonoke, with too much to drink, walked
up to him in a bar, poked a finger in his chest and said: “You’re the one that sent
that tornado and tore my house up…I’m going to take your head off.”
Bonner said he looked for the bouncer, couldn’t spot him, and replied, “That’s
right about the tornado, and I’ll tell you something else, I’ll send another one if you
don’t back off.”
Several years ago, when a major flood left water 10 feet deep in San Diego’s
Mission Valley, Mike Ambrose of KGTV recalls that a woman walked up to his car,
whacked the windshield with an umbrella and said, “This rain is your fault.”
Chuck Whitaker of WSBT-TV in South Bend, Ind., says, “One little old lady called
the police department and wanted the weatherman arrested for bringing all the
snow.”
A woman upset that it had rained for her daughter’s wedding called Tom Jolls
of WKBW-TV in Buffalo, N.Y., to give him a piece of her mind. “She held me responsible and said if she ever met me she would probably hit me,” he said.
Sonny Eliot of WJBK-TV, a forecaster in the Detroit area for 30 years, recalls
predicting 2 to 4 inches of snow in the city several years ago and more than 8 came
down. To retaliate, his colleagues at the station set up a contraption that rained
about 200 galoshes on him while he was giving the forecast the next day.

“I’ve still got the lumps to prove it,” he says.

FIGURE 5-2
Weatherbeaten
Note the similarities between the account of the weatherman who came
to my office and those of other TV weather reporters.
(DAVID L. LANGFORD, ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Our instruction in how the negative association works seems to have
been primarily undertaken by the mothers of our society. Remember
how they were always warning us against playing with the bad kids
down the street? Remember how they said it didn’t matter if we did
nothing bad ourselves because, in the eyes of the neighborhood, we
would be “known by the company we kept.” Our mothers were teaching
us about guilt by association. They were giving us a lesson in the negative side of the principle of association. And they were right. People
do assume that we have the same personality traits as our friends.22
As for the positive associations, it is the compliance professionals
who teach the lesson. They are incessantly trying to connect themselves
or their products with the things we like. Did you ever wonder what
all those good-looking models are doing standing around in the automobile ads? What the advertiser hopes they are doing is lending their

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 145
positive traits—beauty and desirability—to the cars. The advertiser is
betting that we will respond to the product in the same ways we respond
to the attractive models merely associated with it.
And they are right. In one study, men who saw a new-car ad that
included a seductive young woman model rated the car as faster, more
appealing, more expensive-looking, and better designed than did men
who viewed the same ad without the model. Yet when asked later, the
men refused to believe that the presence of the young woman had influenced their judgments.23
Because the association principle works so well—and so unconsciously—manufacturers regularly rush to connect their products with
the current cultural rage. During the days of the first American moon
shot, everything from breakfast drink to deodorant was sold with allusions to the U.S. space program. In Olympiad years, we are told precisely
which is the “official” hair spray and facial tissue of our Olympic
teams.24 During the 1970s, when the magic cultural concept appeared
to be “naturalness,” the “natural” bandwagon was crowded to capacity.
Sometimes the connections to naturalness didn’t even make sense:
“Change your hair color naturally,” urged one popular TV commercial.
The linking of celebrities to products is another way advertisers cash
in on the association principle. Professional athletes are paid to connect
themselves to things that can be directly relevant to their roles (sport
shoes, tennis rackets, golf balls) or wholly irrelevant (soft drinks, popcorn poppers, panty hose). The important thing for the advertiser is to
establish the connection; it doesn’t have to be a logical one, just a positive
one.
Of course, popular entertainers provide another form of desirability
that manufacturers have always paid dearly to tie to their goods. But
recently, politicians have caught on to the ability of a celebrity linkage
to sway voters. Presidential candidates assemble stables of well-known
nonpolitical figures who either actively participate in the campaign or
merely lend their names to it. Even at the state and local level, a similar
game is played. Take as evidence the comment of a Los Angeles woman
I overheard expressing her conflicting feelings about a California referendum to limit smoking in public places. “It’s a real tough decision.
They’ve got big stars speaking for it, and big stars speaking against it.
You don’t know how to vote.”
If politicians are relative newcomers to the use of celebrity endorsements, they are old hands at exploiting the association principle in
other ways. For example, congressional representatives traditionally
announce to the press the start of federal projects that will bring new
jobs or benefits to their home states; this is true even when a represent-

146 / Influence
ative has had nothing to do with advancing the project or has, in some
cases, voted against it.
While politicians have long strained to associate themselves with the
values of motherhood, country, and apple pie, it may be in the last of
these connections—to food—that they have been most clever. For instance, it is White House tradition to try to sway the votes of balking
legislators over a meal. It can be a picnic lunch, a sumptuous breakfast,
or an elegant dinner; but when an important bill is up for grabs, out
comes the silverware. And political fund-raising these days regularly
involves the presentation of food. Notice, too, that at the typical fundraising dinner the speeches, the appeals for further contributions and
heightened effort never come before the meal is served, only during or
after. The advantages to this pairing of the affairs of the table with those
of the state are several: For example, time is saved and the reciprocity
rule is engaged. The least recognized benefit, however, may be the one
uncovered in research conducted in the 1930s by the distinguished
psychologist Gregory Razran.
Using what he termed the “luncheon technique,” he found that his
subjects became fonder of the people and things they experienced while
they were eating. In the example most relevant for our purposes,
Razran’s subjects were presented with some political statements they
had rated once before. At the end of the experiment, after all the political statements had been presented, Razran found that only certain of
them had gained in approval—those that had been shown while food
was being eaten. And these changes in liking seem to have occurred
unconsciously, since the subjects could not remember which of the
statements they had seen during the food service.
How did Razran come up with the luncheon technique? What made
him think it would work? The answer may lie in the dual scholarly
roles he played during his career. Not only was he a respected independent researcher, he was also one of the earliest translators into English
of the pioneering psychological literature of Russia. It was a literature
dedicated to the study of the association principle and dominated by
the thinking of a brilliant man, Ivan Pavlov.
Although a scientist of varied and elaborated talent—he had, for instance, won a Nobel Prize years earlier for his work on the digestive
system—Pavlov’s most important experimental demonstration was
simplicity itself. He showed that he could get an animal’s typical response to food (salivation) to be directed toward something irrelevant
to food (a bell) merely by connecting the two things in the animal’s
mind. If the presentation of food to a dog was always accompanied by
the sound of a bell, soon the dog would salivate to the bell alone, even
when there was no food to be had.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 147
It is not a long step from Pavlov’s classic demonstration to Razran’s
luncheon technique. Obviously, a normal reaction to food can be
transferred to some other thing through the process of raw association.
Razran’s insight was that there are many normal responses to food besides salivation, one of them being a good and favorable feeling.
Therefore, it is possible to attach this pleasant feeling, this positive attitude, to anything (political statements being only an example) that is
closely associated with good food.
Nor is there a long step from the luncheon technique to the compliance professionals’ realization that all kinds of desirable things can
substitute for food in lending their likable qualities to the ideas,
products, and people artificially linked to them. In the final analysis,
then, that is why those good-looking models are standing around in
the magazine ads. And that is why radio programmers are instructed
to insert the station’s call-letters jingle immediately before a big hit song
is played. And that is even why the women playing Barnyard Bingo at
a Tupperware party must yell the word “Tupperware” rather than
“Bingo” before they can rush to the center of the floor for a prize. It
may be “Tupperware” for the women, but it’s “Bingo” for the company.
Just because we are often the unaware victims of compliance practitioners’ use of the association principle doesn’t mean that we don’t
understand how it works or don’t use it ourselves. There is ample
evidence, for instance, that we understand fully the predicament of a
Persian imperial messenger or modern-day weatherman announcing
bad news. In fact, we can be counted on to take steps to avoid putting
ourselves in any similar positions. Research done at the University of
Georgia shows just how we operate when faced with the task of communicating good or bad news. Students waiting for an experiment to
begin were given the job of informing a fellow student that an important
phone call had come in for him. Half the time the call was supposed to
bring good news and half the time, bad news. The researchers found
that the students conveyed the information very differently, depending
on its quality. When the news was positive, the tellers were sure to
mention that feature: “You just got a phone call with great news. Better
see the experimenter for the details.” But when the news was unfavorable, they kept themselves apart from it: “You just got a phone call.
Better see the experimenter for the details.” Obviously, the students
had previously learned that, to be liked, they should connect themselves
to good news but not bad news.25
A lot of strange behavior can be explained by the fact that people
understand the association principle well enough to strive to link

148 / Influence
themselves to positive events and separate themselves from negative
events—even when they have not caused the events. Some of the
strangest of such behavior takes place in the great arena of sports. The
actions of the athletes are not the issue here, though. After all, in the
heated contact of the game, they are entitled to an occasional eccentric
outburst. Instead, it is the often raging, irrational, boundless fervor of
the sports fan that seems, on its face, so puzzling. How can we account
for wild sports riots in Europe, or the murder of players and referees
by South American soccer crowds gone berserk, or the unnecessary
lavishness of the gifts provided by local fans to already wealthy
American ballplayers on the special “day” set aside to honor them?
Rationally, none of this makes sense. It’s just a game! Isn’t it?
Hardly. The relationship between sport and the earnest fan is anything
but gamelike. It is serious, intense, and highly personal. An apt illustration comes from one of my favorite anecdotes. It concerns a World War
II soldier who returned to his home in the Balkans after the war and
shortly thereafter stopped speaking. Medical examinations could find
no physical cause for the problem. There was no wound, no brain
damage, no vocal impairment. He could read, write, understand a
conversation, and follow orders. Yet he would not talk—not for his
doctors, not for his friends, not even for his pleading family.
Perplexed and exasperated, his doctors moved him to another city
and placed him in a veterans’ hospital where he remained for thirty
years, never breaking his self-imposed silence and sinking into a life of
social isolation. Then one day, a radio in his ward happened to be tuned
to a soccer match between his hometown team and a traditional rival.
When at a crucial point of play the referee called a foul against a player
from the man’s home team, the mute veteran jumped from his chair,
glared at the radio, and spoke his first words in more than three decades:
“You dumb ass!” he cried. “Are you trying to give them the match?”
With that, he returned to his chair and to a silence he never again violated.
There are two important lessons to be derived from this true story.
The first concerns the sheer power of the phenomenon. The veteran’s
desire to have his hometown team succeed was so strong that it alone
produced a deviation from his solidly entrenched way of life. Similar
effects of sports events on the long-standing habits of fans are far from
unique to the back wards of veterans’ hospitals. During the 1980 Winter
Olympics, after the U.S. hockey team had upset the vastly favored Soviet
team, the teetotaling father of the American goaltender, Jim Craig, was
offered a flask. “I’ve never had a drink in my life,” he reported later,
“but someone behind me handed me cognac. I drank it. Yes, I did.” Nor
was such unusual behavior unique to parents of the players. Fans out-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 149
side the hockey arena were described in news accounts as delirious:
“They hugged, sang, and turned somersaults in the snow.” Even those
fans not present at Lake Placid exulted in the victory and displayed
their pride with bizarre behavior. In Raleigh, North Carolina, a swim
meet had to be halted when, after the hockey score was announced, the
competitors and audience alike chanted “U.S.A.! U.S.A.!” until they
were hoarse. In Cambridge, Massachusetts, a quiet supermarket erupted
at the news into a riot of flying toilet tissue and paper towel streamers.
The customers were joined in their spree—and soon led—by the market
employees and manager.
Without question, the force is deep and sweeping. But if we return
to the account of the silent veteran, we can see that something else is
revealed about the nature of the union of sports and sports fan, something crucial to its basic character: It is a personal thing. Whatever
fragment of an identity that ravaged, mute man still possessed was
engaged by soccer play. No matter how weakened his ego may have
become after thirty years of wordless stagnation in a hospital ward, it
was involved in the outcome of the match. Why? Because he, personally,
would be diminished by a hometown defeat. How? Through the principle of association. The mere connection of birthplace hooked him,
wrapped him, tied him to the approaching triumph or failure. As distinguished author Isaac Asimov put it in describing our reactions to
the contests we view, “All things being equal, you root for your own
sex, your own culture, your own locality…and what you want to prove
is that you are better than the other person. Whomever you root for
represents you; and when he wins, you win.”26
When viewed in this light, the passion of the sports fan begins to
make sense. The game is no light diversion to be enjoyed for its inherent
form and artistry. The self is at stake. That is why hometown crowds
are so adoring and, more tellingly, so grateful toward those regularly
responsible for home-team victories. That is also why the same crowds
are often ferocious in their treatment of players, coaches, and officials
implicated in athletic failures.
Fans’ intolerance of defeat can shorten the careers of even successful
players and coaches. Take the case of Frank Layden, who abruptly quit
as coach of the NBA’s Utah Jazz while the team was leading the league’s
Midwest Division. Layden’s relative success, warm humor, and widely
known charitable activities in the Salt Lake City area were not enough
to shield him from the ire of some Jazz supporters after team losses.
Citing a brace of incidents with abusive fans, including one in which
people waited around for an hour to curse at him following a defeat,
Layden explained his decision: “Sometimes in the NBA, you feel like
a dog. I’ve had people spit on me. I had a guy come up to me and say,

150 / Influence
‘I’m a lawyer. Hit me, hit me, so I can sue you.’ I think America takes
all sports too seriously.”
So we want our affiliated sports teams to win to prove our own superiority. But to whom are we trying to prove it? Ourselves, certainly;
but to everyone else, too. According to the association principle, if we
can surround ourselves with success that we are connected with in even
a superficial way (for example, place of residence), our public prestige
will rise.
Are sports fans right to think that without ever throwing a block,
catching a ball, scoring a goal, or perhaps even attending a game, they
will receive some of the glory from a hometown championship? I believe
so. The evidence is in their favor. Recall that Persia’s messengers did
not have to cause the news, my weatherman did not have to cause the
weather, and Pavlov’s bell did not have to cause the food for powerful
effects to occur. The association was enough.
It is for this reason that, were the University of Southern California
to win the Rose Bowl, we could expect people with a Southern Cal
connection to try to increase the visibility of that connection in any of
a variety of ways. In one experiment showing how wearing apparel
can serve to proclaim such an association, researchers counted the
number of school sweatshirts worn on Monday mornings by students
on the campuses of seven prominent football universities: Arizona State,
Louisiana State, Notre Dame, Michigan, Ohio State, Pittsburgh, and
Southern California. The results showed that many more home-school
shirts were worn if the football team had won its game on the prior
Saturday. What’s more, the larger the margin of victory, the more such
shirts appeared. It wasn’t a close, hard-fought game that caused the
students to dress themselves, literally, in success; instead, it was a clear,
crushing conquest smacking of indisputable superiority.
This tendency to try to bask in reflected glory by publicly trumpeting
our connections to successful others has its mirror image in our attempt
to avoid being darkened by the shadow of others’ defeat. In an amazing
display during the luckless 1980 season, season-ticket-holding fans of
the New Orleans Saints football team began to appear at the stadium
wearing paper bags to conceal their faces. As their team suffered loss
after loss, more and more fans donned the bags until TV cameras were
regularly able to record the extraordinary image of gathered masses of
people shrouded in brown paper with nothing to identify them but the
tips of their noses. I find it instructive that during a late-season contest,
when it was clear that the Saints were at last going to win one, the fans
discarded their bags and went public once more.
All this tells me that we purposefully manipulate the visibility of our
connections with winners and losers in order to make ourselves look

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 151
good to anyone who could view these connections. By showcasing the
positive associations and burying the negative ones, we are trying to
get observers to think more highly of us and to like us more. There are
many ways we go about this, but one of the simplest and most pervasive
is in the pronouns we use. Have you noticed, for example, how often
after a home-team victory fans crowd into the range of a TV camera,
thrust their index fingers high, and shout, “We’re number one! We’re
number one!” Note that the call is not “They’re number one” or even
“Our team is number one.” The pronoun is “we,” designed to imply
the closest possible identity with the team.
Note also that nothing similar occurs in the case of failure. No television viewer will ever hear the chant, “We’re in last place! We’re in last
place!” Home-team defeats are the times for distancing oneself. Here
“we” is not nearly as preferred as the insulating pronoun “they.” To
prove the point, I once did a small experiment in which students at
Arizona State University were phoned and asked to describe the outcome of a football game their school team had played a few weeks
earlier. Some of the students were asked the outcome of a certain game
their team had lost; the other students were asked the outcome of a
different game—one their team had won. My fellow researcher, Avril
Thorne, and I simply listened to what was said and recorded the percentage of students who used the word “we” in their descriptions.
When the results were tabulated, it was obvious that the students had
tried to connect themselves to success by using the pronoun “we” to
describe their school-team victory—“We beat Houston, seventeen to
fourteen,” or “We won.” In the case of the lost game, however, “we”
was rarely used. Instead, the students used terms designed to keep
themselves separate from their vanquished team—“They lost to Missouri, thirty to twenty,” or “I don’t know the score, but Arizona State
got beat.” Perhaps the twin desires to connect ourselves to winners and
to distance ourselves from losers were combined consummately in the
remarks of one particular student. After dryly recounting the score of
the home-team defeat—“Arizona State lost it, thirty to twenty”—he
blurted in anguish, “They threw away our chance for a national championship!”27
If it is true that, to make ourselves look good, we try to bask in the
reflected glory of the successes we are even remotely associated with,
a provocative implication emerges: We will be most likely to use this
approach when we feel that we don’t look so good. When-ever our
public image is damaged, we will experience an increased desire to restore that image by trumpeting our ties to successful others. At the same
time, we will most scrupulously avoid publicizing our ties to failing

152 / Influence
others. Support for these ideas comes from the telephone study of Arizona State University students. Before being asked about the hometeam victory or loss, they were given a test of their general knowledge.
The test was rigged so that some of the students would fail badly while
the others would do quite well.
So at the time they were asked to describe the football score, half of
the students had experienced recent image damage from their failure
of the test. These students later showed the greatest need to manipulate
their connections with the football team to salvage their prestige. If they
were asked to describe the team defeat, only 17 percent used the pronoun “we” in so doing. If, however, they were asked to describe the
win, 41 percent said “we.”
The story was very different, though, for the students who had done
well on the general knowledge test. They later used “we” about equally,
whether they were describing a home-team victory (25 percent) or defeat
(24 percent). These students had bolstered their images through their
own achievement and didn’t need to do so through the achievement
of others. This finding tells me that it is not when we have a strong
feeling of recognized personal accomplishment that we will seek to
bask in reflected glory. Instead, it will be when prestige (both public
and private) is low that we will be intent upon using the successes of
associated others to help restore image.
I think it revealing that the remarkable hubbub following the American hockey team victory in the 1980 Olympics came at a time of recently
diminished American prestige. The U.S. government had been helpless
to prevent both the holding of American hostages in Iran and the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan. It was a time when, as a citizenry, we needed
the triumph of that hockey team and we needed to display or even
manufacture our connections to it. We should not be surprised to learn,
for instance, that outside the hockey arena, in the aftermath of the win
over the Soviet team, scalpers were getting a hundred dollars a pair for
ticket stubs.
Although the desire to bask in reflected glory exists to a degree in all
of us, there seems to be something special about people who would
wait in the snow to spend fifty dollars apiece for the shreds of tickets
to a game they had not attended, presumably to “prove” to friends back
home that they had been present at the big victory. Just what kind of
people are they? Unless I miss my guess, they are not merely great
sports aficionados; they are individuals with a hidden personality
flaw—a poor self-concept. Deep inside is a sense of low personal worth
that directs them to seek prestige not from the generation or promotion
of their own attainments, but from the generation or promotion of their
associations with others of attainment. There are several varieties of

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 153
this species that bloom throughout our culture. The persistent namedropper is a classic example. So, too, is the rock-music groupie, who
trades sexual favors for the right to tell girlfriends that she was “with”
a famous musician for a time. No matter which form it takes, the behavior of such individuals shares a similar theme—the rather tragic view
of accomplishment as deriving from outside the self.
Certain of these people work the association principle in a slightly
different way. Instead of striving to inflate their visible connections to
others of success, they strive to inflate the success of others they are
visibly connected to. The clearest illustration is the notorious “stage
mother,” obsessed with securing stardom for her child. Of course, women are not alone in this regard. In 1991 a Davenport, Iowa, obstetrician
cut off service to the wives of three school officials, reportedly because
his son had not been given enough playing time in school basketball
games. One of the wives was eight months’ pregnant at the time.
Physicians’ wives often speak of the pressures to obtain personal
prestige by association with their husband’s professional stature. John
Pekkanen, who authored the book The Best Doctors in the U.S., reports
that many enraged protests to his list came not from the physicians
who were omitted but from their wives. In one instance that reveals
the extent to which the principle of association dominates the thinking
of some of these women, Pekkanen received a letter from a frantic wife
along with her proof that her husband deserved to be on the list of best
doctors. It was a photograph of the man with Merv Griffin.

HOW TO SAY NO
Because liking can be increased by many means, a proper consideration
of defenses against compliance professionals who employ the liking
rule must, oddly enough, be a short one. It would be pointless to construct a horde of specific countertactics to combat each of the myriad
versions of the various ways to influence liking. There are simply too
many routes to be blocked effectively with such a one-on-one strategy.
Besides, several of the factors leading to liking—physical attractiveness,
familiarity, association—have been shown to work unconsciously to
produce their effects on us, making it unlikely that we could muster a
timely protection against them.
Instead we need to consider a general approach, one that can be applied to any of the liking-related factors to neutralize their unwelcome
influence on our compliance decisions. The secret to such an approach
may lie in its timing. Rather than trying to recognize and prevent the
action of liking factors before they have a chance to work on us, we
might be well advised to let them work. Our vigilance should be directed

154 / Influence
not toward the things that may produce undue liking for a compliance
practitioner, but toward the fact that undue liking has been produced.
The time to react protectively is when we feel ourselves liking the
practitioner more than we should under the circumstances.
By concentrating our attention on the effect rather than the causes,
we can avoid the laborious, nearly impossible task of trying to detect
and deflect the many psychological influences on liking. Instead, we
have to be sensitive to only one thing related to liking in our contacts
with compliance practitioners: the feeling that we have come to like the
practitioner more quickly or more deeply than we would have expected.
Once we notice this feeling, we will have been tipped off that there is
probably some tactic being used, and we can start taking the necessary
countermeasures. Note that the strategy I am suggesting borrows much
from the jujitsu style favored by the compliance professionals themselves. We don’t attempt to restrain the influence of the factors that
cause liking. Quite the contrary. We allow these factors to exert their
force, and then we use that force in our campaign against them. The
stronger the force, the more conspicuous it becomes and, consequently,
the more subject to our alerted defenses.
Suppose, for example, we find ourselves bargaining on the price of
a new car with Dealin’ Dan, a candidate for Joe Girard’s vacated
“greatest car salesman” title. After talking a while and negotiating a
bit, Dan wants to close the deal; he wants us to decide to buy the car.
Before any such decision is made, it would be important to ask ourselves
a crucial question: “In the twenty-five minutes I’ve known this guy,
have I come to like him more than I would have expected?” If the answer
is yes, we might want to reflect upon whether Dan behaved during
those few minutes in ways that we know affect liking. We might recall
that he had fed us (coffee and doughnuts) before launching into his
pitch, that he had complimented us on our choice of options and color
combinations, that he had made us laugh, that he had cooperated with
us against the sales manager to get us a better deal.
Although such a review of events might be informative, it is not a
necessary step in protecting ourselves from the liking rule. Once we
discover that we have come to like Dan more than we would have expected to, we don’t have to know why. The simple recognition of unwarranted liking should be enough to get us to react against it. One
possible reaction would be to reverse the process and actively dislike
Dan. But that might be unfair to him and contrary to our own interests.
After all, some individuals are naturally likable, and Dan might just be
one of them. It wouldn’t be right to turn automatically against those
compliance professionals who happen to be most likable. Besides, for
our own sakes, we wouldn’t want to shut ourselves off from business

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 155
interactions with such nice people, especially when they may be offering
us the best available deal.
I would recommend a different reaction. If our answer to the crucial
question is “Yes, under the circumstances, I like this guy peculiarly
well,” this should be the signal that the time has come for a quick
countermaneuver: Mentally separate Dan from that Chevy or Toyota
he’s trying to sell. It is vital to remember at this point that, should we
decide for Dan’s car, we will be driving it, not him, off the dealership
lot. It is irrelevant to a wise automobile purchase that we find Dan
likable because he is good-looking, claims an interest in our favorite
hobby, is funny, or has relatives back where we grew up.
Our proper response, then, is a conscious effort to concentrate exclusively on the merits of the deal and car Dan has for us. Of course, in
making a compliance decision, it is always a good idea to keep separate
our feelings about the requester and the request. But once immersed in
even a brief personal and sociable contact with a requester, that distinction is easy to forget. In those instances when we don’t care one way
or the other about a requester, forgetting to make the distinction won’t
steer us very far wrong. The big mistakes are likely to come when we
are fond of the person making a request.
That’s why it is so important to be alert to a sense of undue liking for
a compliance practitioner. The recognition of that feeling can serve as
our reminder to separate the dealer from the merits of the deal and to
make our decision based on considerations related only to the latter.
Were we all to follow this procedure, I am certain we would be much
more pleased with the results of our exchanges with compliance professionals—though I suspect that Dealin’ Dan would not.
READER’S REPORT

From a Chicago Man
“Although I’ve never been to a Tupperware party, I recognized the
same kind of friendship pressures recently when I got a call from a
long-distance-phone-company saleswoman. She told me that one of
my buddies had placed my name on something called the MCI Friends
and Family Calling Circle.
“This friend of mine, Brad, is a guy I grew up with but who moved
to New Jersey last year for a job. He still calls me pretty regularly to get
the news on the guys we used to hang out with from the neighborhood.
The saleswoman told me that he can save twenty percent on all the calls
he makes to the people on his Calling Circle list, provided that they are
MCI-phone-company subscribers. Then she asked me if I wanted to

156 / Influence
switch to MCI to get all the blah, blah, blah benefits of MCI service, and
so that Brad could save twenty percent on his calls to me.
“Well, I couldn’t have cared less about the benefits of MCI service; I
was perfectly happy with the long-distance company I had. But the
part about wanting to save Brad money on our calls really got to me.
For me to say that I didn’t want to be in his Calling Circle and didn’t
care about saving him money would have sounded like a real affront
to our friendship when he learned of it. So, to avoid insulting him, I
told her to switch me to MCI.
“I used to wonder why women would go to a Tupperware party just
because a friend was holding it, and then buy stuff they didn’t want
once they were there. I don’t wonder anymore.”
This reader is not alone in being able to testify to the power of the
pressures embodied in MCI’s Calling Circle idea. When Consumer
Reports magazine inquired into the practice, the MCI salesperson they
interviewed was quite succinct: “It works nine out of ten times,” he
said.

Chapter 6
AUTHORITY
Directed Deference
Follow an expert.
—VIRGIL

S an ad for volunteers to take part in a “study of memory” beingnotice
done
UPPOSE THAT WHILE LEAFING THROUGH THE NEWSPAPER, YOU

in the psychology department of a nearby university. Let’s suppose
further that, finding the idea of such an experiment intriguing, you
contact the director of the study, a Professor Stanley Milgram, and make
arrangements to participate in an hour-long session. When you arrive
at the laboratory suite, you meet two men. One is the researcher in
charge of the experiment, as is clearly evidenced by the gray lab coat
he wears and the clipboard he carries. The other is a volunteer like
yourself who seems average in all respects.
After initial greetings and pleasantries are exchanged, the researcher
begins to explain the procedures to be followed. He says that the experiment is a study of how punishment affects learning and memory.
Therefore, one participant will have the task of learning pairs of words
in a long list until each pair can be recalled perfectly; this person is to
be called the Learner. The other partici-pant’s job will be to test the
Learner’s memory and to deliver increasingly strong electric shocks for
every mistake; this person will be designated the Teacher.
Naturally, you get a bit nervous at this news. And your apprehension
increases when, after drawing lots with your partner, you find that you
are assigned the Learner role. You hadn’t expected the possibility of
pain as part of the study, so you briefly consider leaving. But no, you

158 / Influence
think, there’s plenty of time for that if need be and, besides, how strong
a shock could it be?
After you have had a chance to study the list of word pairs, the researcher straps you into a chair and, with the Teacher looking on, attaches electrodes to your arm. More worried now about the effect of
the shock, you inquire into its severity. The researcher’s response is
hardly comforting; he says that although the shocks can be extremely
painful, they will cause you “no permanent tissue damage.” With that,
the researcher and the Teacher leave you alone and go to the next room,
where the Teacher asks you the test questions through an intercom
system and delivers electric punishment for every wrong response.
As the test proceeds, you quickly recognize the pattern that the
Teacher follows: He asks the question and waits for your answer over
the intercom. Whenever you err, he announces the voltage of the shock
you are about to receive and pulls a level to deliver the punishment.
The most troubling thing is that with each error you make, the shock
increases by 15 volts.
The first part of the test progresses smoothly. The shocks are annoying
but tolerable. Later on, though, as your mistakes accumulate and the
shock voltages climb, the punishment begins to hurt enough to disrupt
your concentration, which leads to more errors and ever more disruptive
shocks. At the 75-, 90-, and 105-volt levels, the pain makes you grunt
audibly. At 120 volts, you exclaim into the intercom that the shocks are
really starting to hurt. You take one more punishment with a groan and
decide that you can’t take much more pain. After the Teacher delivers
the 150-volt shock, you shout back into the intercom, “That’s all! Get
me out of here! Get me out of here, please! Let me out!”
But instead of the assurance you expect from the Teacher that he and
the researcher are coming to release you, the Teacher merely gives you
the next test question to answer. Surprised and confused, you mumble
the first answer to come into your head. It’s wrong, of course, and the
Teacher delivers a 165-volt shock. You scream at the Teacher to stop,
to let you out. But he responds only with the next test question—and
with the next slashing shock when your frenzied answer is incorrect.
You can’t hold down the panic any longer; the shocks are so strong
now they make you writhe and shriek. You kick the wall, demand to
be released, beg the Teacher to help you. But the test questions continue
as before and so do the dreaded shocks—in searing jolts of 195, 210,
225, 240, 255, 270, 285, and 300 volts. You realize that you can’t possibly
answer the test correctly now, so you shout to the Teacher that you
won’t answer his questions any longer. Nothing changes; the Teacher
interprets your failure to respond as an incorrect response and sends
another bolt. The ordeal continues in this way until, finally, the power

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 159
of the shocks stuns you into near paralysis. You can no longer cry out,
no longer struggle. You can only feel each terrible electric bite. Perhaps,
you think, this total inactivity will cause the Teacher to stop. There can
be no reason to continue this experiment. But he proceeds relentlessly,
calling out the test questions, announcing the horrid shock levels (about
400 volts now), and pulling the levers. What must this man be like? you
wonder in confusion. Why doesn’t he help me? Why won’t he stop?
For most of us, the above scenario reads like a bad dream. To recognize how nightmarish it is, though, we should understand that in most
respects it is real. There was such an experiment—actually, a whole
series—run by a psychology professor named Milgram in which participants in the Teacher role were willing to deliver continued, intense,
and dangerous levels of shock to a kicking, screeching, pleading other
person. Only one major aspect of the experiment was not genuine. No
real shock was delivered; the Learner, the victim who repeatedly cried
out in agony for mercy and release, was not a true subject but an actor
who only pretended to be shocked. The actual purpose of Milgram’s
study, then, had nothing to do with the effects of punishment on
learning and memory. Rather, it involved an entirely different question:
When it is their job, how much suffering will ordinary people be willing
to inflict on an entirely innocent other person?
The answer is most unsettling. Under circumstances mirroring precisely the features of the “bad dream,” the typical Teacher was willing
to deliver as much pain as was available to give. Rather than yield to
the pleas of the victim, about two thirds of the subjects in Milgram’s
experiment pulled every one of the thirty shock switches in front of
them and continued to engage the last switch (450 volts) until the researcher ended the experiment. More alarming still, not one of the forty
subjects in this study quit his job as Teacher when the victim first began
to demand his release; nor later, when he began to beg for it; nor even
later, when his reaction to each shock had become, in Milgram’s words,
“definitely an agonized scream.” Not until the 300-volt shock had been
sent and the victim had “shouted in desperation that he would no longer
provide answers to the memory test” did anyone stop—and even then,
it was a distinct minority who did.
These results surprised everyone associated with the project, Milgram
included. In fact, before the study began, he asked groups of colleagues,
graduate students, and psychology majors at Yale University (where
the experiment was performed) to read a copy of the experimental
procedures and estimate how many subjects would go all the way to
the last (450-volt) shock. Invariably, the answers fell in the 1 to 2 percent
range. A separate group of thirty-nine psychiatrists predicted that only

160 / Influence
about one person in a thousand would be willing to continue to the
end. No one, then, was prepared for the behavior patterns that the experiment actually produced.
How can we explain those alarming patterns? Perhaps, as some have
argued, it has to do with the fact that the subjects were all males who
are known as a group for their aggressive tendencies, or that the subjects
didn’t recognize the potential harm that such high shock voltages could
cause, or that the subjects were a freakish collection of moral cretins
who enjoyed the chance to inflict misery. But there is good evidence
against each of these possibilities. First, the subjects’ sex was shown by
a later experiment to be irrelevant to their willingness to give all the
shocks to the victim; female Teachers were just as likely to do so as the
males in Milgram’s initial study.
The explanation that subjects weren’t aware of the potential physical
danger to the victim was also examined in a subsequent experiment
and found to be wanting. In that version, when the victim was instructed
to announce that he had a heart condition and to declare that his heart
was being affected by the shock—“That’s all. Get me out of here. I told
you I had heart trouble. My heart’s starting to bother me. I refuse to go
on. Let me out”—the results were the same as before; 65 percent of the
subjects carried out their duties faithfully through the maximum shock.
Finally, the explanation that Milgram’s subjects were a twisted, sadistic bunch not at all representative of the average citizen has proven
unsatisfactory as well. The people who answered Milgram’s newspaper
ad to participate in his “memory” experiment represented a standard
cross section of ages, occupations, and educational levels within our
society. What’s more, later on, a battery of personality scales showed
these people to be quite normal psychologically, with not a hint of
psychosis as a group. They were, in fact, just like you and me; or, as
Milgram likes to term it, they are you and me. If he is right that his
studies implicate us in their grisly findings, the unanswered question
becomes an uncomfortably personal one: What could make us do such
things?
Milgram is sure he knows the answer. It has to do, he says, with a
deep-seated sense of duty to authority within us all. According to Milgram, the real culprit in the experiments was his subject’s inability to
defy the wishes of the boss of the study—the lab-coated researcher who
urged and, if need be, directed the subjects to perform their duties,
despite the emotional and physical mayhem they were causing.
The evidence supporting Milgram’s obedience to authority explanation is strong. First, it is clear that, without the researcher’s directives
to continue, the subjects would have ended the experiment quickly.
They hated what they were doing and agonized over their victim’s

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 161
agony. They implored the researcher to let them stop. When he refused,
they went on, but in the process they trembled, they perspired, they
shook, they stammered protests and additional pleas for the victim’s
release. Their fingernails dug into their own flesh; they bit their lips
until they bled; they held their heads in their hands; some fell into fits
of uncontrollable nervous laughter. As one outside observer to the experiment wrote:
I observed a mature and initially poised businessman enter the
laboratory smiling and confident. Within twenty minutes he was
reduced to a twitching, stuttering wreck who was rapidly approaching a point of nervous collapse. He constantly pulled on his earlobe
and twisted his hands. At one point he pushed his fist into his
forehead and muttered: “Oh, God, let’s stop it.” And yet he continued to respond to every word of the experimenter and obeyed
to the end.1
In addition to these observations, Milgram has provided even more
convincing evidence for the obedience-to-authority interpretation of
his subjects’ behavior. In a later study, for instance, he had the researcher
and the victim switch scripts so that the researcher told the Teacher to
stop delivering shocks to the victim, while the victim insisted bravely
that the Teacher continue. The result couldn’t have been clearer; 100
percent of the subjects refused to give one additional shock when it was
merely the fellow subject who demanded it. The identical finding appeared in another version of the experiment in which the researcher
and fellow subject switched roles so that it was the researcher who was
strapped into the chair and the fellow subject who ordered the Teacher
to continue—over the protests of the researcher. Again, not one subject
touched another shock lever.
The extreme degree to which subjects in Milgram’s situation were
attentive to the wishes of authority was documented in yet another
variation of the basic study. In this case, Milgram presented the
Teacher with two researchers, who issued contradictory orders; one
ordered the Teacher to terminate the shocks when the victim cried out
for release, while the other maintained that the experiment should go
on. These conflicting instructions reliably produced what may have
been the project’s only humor: In tragicomic befuddlement and with
eyes darting from one researcher to another, subjects would beseech
the pair to agree on a single command they could follow: “Wait, wait.
Which is it going to be? One says stop, one says go. Which is it!?” When
the researchers remained at loggerheads, the subjects tried frantically
to determine who was the bigger boss. Failing this route to obedience
with the authority, every subject finally followed his better instincts and

162 / Influence
ended the shocks. As in the other experimental variations, such a result
would hardly be expected had the subjects’ motivations involved some
form of sadism or neurotic aggressiveness.2
To Milgram’s mind, evidence of a chilling phenomenon emerges repeatedly from his accumulated data: “It is the extreme willingness of
adults to go to almost any lengths on the command of an authority that
constitutes the chief finding of the study.” There are sobering implications of this finding for those concerned about the ability of another
form of authority—government—to extract frightening levels of obedience from ordinary citizens.3 Furthermore, the finding tells us something about the sheer strength of authority pressures in controlling our
behavior. After witnessing Milgram’s subjects squirming and sweating
and suffering at their task, could anyone doubt the power of the force
that held them there?
For those whose doubts remain, the story of S. Brian Willson might
prove instructive. On September 1, 1987, to protest U.S. shipments of
military equipment to Nicaragua, Mr. Willson and two other men
stretched their bodies across the railroad tracks leading out of the
Concord, California, Naval Weapons Station. The protesters were confident that their act would halt the scheduled train’s progress that day,
as they had notified Navy and railroad officials of their intent three
days before. But the civilian crew, which had been given orders not to
stop, never even slowed the train, despite being able to see the protesters
six hundred feet ahead. Although two of the men managed to scramble
out of harm’s way, Mr. Willson was not quick enough to avoid being
struck and having both legs severed below the knee. Because Navy
medical corpsmen at the scene refused to treat him or allow him to be
taken to the hospital in their ambulance, onlookers—including Mr.
Willson’s wife and son—were left to try to stanch the flow of blood for
forty-five minutes until a private ambulance arrived.
Amazingly, Mr. Willson, who served four years in Vietnam, does not
blame either the crewmen or the corpsmen for his misfortune; he points
his finger, instead, at a system that constrained their actions through
the pressure to obey: “They were just doing what I did in ’Nam. They
were following orders that are part of an insane policy. They’re the fall
guys.” Although the crew members shared Mr. Willson’s assessment
of them as victims, they did not share his magnanimity. In what is
perhaps the most remarkable aspect of the incident, the train crew filed
suit against him, requesting punitive damages for the “humiliation,
mental anguish, and physical stress” they suffered because he hadn’t
allowed them to carry out their orders without cutting off his legs.
Whenever we are faced with so potent a motivator of human action,

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 163
it is natural to expect that good reasons exist for the motivation. In the
case of obedience to authority, even a brief consideration of human social
organization offers justification aplenty. A multilayered and widely
accepted system of authority confers an immense advantage upon a
society. It allows the development of sophisticated structures for resource production, trade, defense, expansion, and social control that
would otherwise be impossible. The other alternative, anarchy, is a state
that is hardly known for its beneficial effects on cultural groups and
one that the social philosopher Thomas Hobbes assures us would render
life “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.” Consequently, we are
trained from birth that obedience to proper authority is right and disobedience is wrong. The essential message fills the parental lessons,
the schoolhouse rhymes, stories, and songs of our childhood and is
carried forward in the legal, military, and political systems we encounter
as adults. Notions of submission and loyalty to legitimate rule are accorded much value in each.
Religious instruction contributes as well. The very first book of the
Bible, for example, describes how failure to obey the ultimate authority
produced the loss of paradise for Adam, Eve, and the rest of the human
race. Should that particular metaphor prove too subtle, just a bit further
into the Old Testament we can read—in what might be the closest biblical representation of the Milgram experiment—the respectful account
of Abraham’s willingness to plunge a dagger through the heart of his
young son, because God, without any explanation, ordered it. We learn
it this story that the correctness of an action was not adjudged by such
considerations as apparent senselessness, harmfulness, injustice, or
usual moral standards, but by the mere command of a higher authority.
Abraham’s tormented ordeal was a test of obedience, and he—like
Milgram’s subjects, who perhaps had learned an early lesson from
him—passed.
Stories like those of Abraham and Milgram’s subjects can tell us much
about the power of and value for obedience in our culture. In another
sense, however, they may be misleading as to the way obedience typically occurs. We rarely agonize to such a degree over the pros and cons
of authority’s demands. In fact, our obedience frequently takes place
in a click, whirr fashion, with little or no conscious deliberation. Information from a recognized authority can provide us a valuable shortcut
for deciding how to act in a situation.
After all, as Milgram himself suggests, conforming to the dictates of
authority figures has always had genuine practical advantages for us.
Early on, these people (for example, parents, teachers) knew more than
we did, and we found that taking their advice proved beneficial—partly
because of their greater wisdom and partly because they controlled our

164 / Influence
rewards and punishments. As adults, the same benefits persist for the
same reasons, though the authority figures now appear as employers,
judges, and government leaders. Because their positions speak of superior access to information and power, it makes great sense to comply
with the wishes of properly constituted authorities. It makes so much
sense, in fact, that we often do so when it makes no sense at all.
This paradox is, of course, the same one that attends all major
weapons of influence. In this instance, once we realize that obedience
to authority is mostly rewarding, it is easy to allow ourselves the convenience of automatic obedience. The simultaneous blessing and bane
of such blind obedience is its mechanical character. We don’t have to
think; therefore, we don’t. Although such mindless obedience leads us
to appropriate action in the great majority of cases, there will be conspicuous exceptions—because we are reacting rather than thinking.
Let’s take an example from one facet of our lives where authority
pressures are visible and strong: medicine. Health is enormously important to us. Thus, physicians, who possess large amounts of knowledge and influence in this vital area, hold the position of respected
authorities. In addition, the medical establishment has a clearly terraced
power and prestige structure. The various kinds of health workers well
understand the level of their jobs in this structure; and they well understand, too, that the M.D. sits at the top. No one may overrule the doctor’s
judgment in a case, except perhaps, another doctor of higher rank. As
a consequence, a long-established tradition of automatic obedience to
a doctor’s orders has developed among health-care staffs.
The worrisome possibility arises, then, that when a physician makes
a clear error, no one lower in the hierarchy will think to question
it—precisely because, once a legitimate authority has given an order,
subordinates stop thinking in the situation and start reacting. Mix this
kind of click, whirr response into a complex hospital environment and
mistakes are certain. Indeed a study done in the early 1980s by the U.S.
Health Care Financing Administration showed that, for patient medication alone, the average hospital had a 12 percent daily error rate. A
decade later, things had not improved: According to a Harvard University study, 10 percent of all cardiac arrests in hospitals are attributable
to medication errors. Errors in the medicine patients receive can occur
for a variety of reasons. However, a book entitled Medication Errors:
Causes and Prevention by two Temple University pharmacology professors, Michael Cohen and Neil Davis, attributes much of the problem to
the mindless deference given the “boss” of the patient’s case: the attending physician. According to Professor Cohen, “in case after case, patients,
nurses, pharmacists, and other physicians do not question the prescription.” Take, for example, the strange case of the “rectal earache” reported

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 165
by Cohen and Davis. A physician ordered ear drops to be administered
to the right ear of a patient suffering pain and infection there. But instead
of writing out completely the location “right ear” on the prescription,
the doctor abbreviated it so that the instructions read “place in R ear.”
Upon receiving the prescription, the duty nurse promptly put the required number of ear drops into the patient’s anus.
Obviously, rectal treatment of an earache made no sense. Yet neither
the patient nor the nurse questioned it. The important lesson of this
story is that in many situations where a legitimate authority has spoken,
what would otherwise make sense is irrelevant. In these instances, we
don’t consider the situation as a whole but attend and respond to only
one aspect of it.4
Wherever our behaviors are governed in such an unthinking manner,
we can be confident that there will be compliance professionals trying
to take advantage. We can stay within the field of medicine and see that
advertisers have frequently harnessed the respect accorded to doctors
in our culture by hiring actors to play the roles of doctors speaking on
behalf of the product. My favorite example is a TV commercial featuring
actor Robert Young counseling people against the dangers of caffeine
and recommending caffeine-free Sanka Brand coffee. The commercial
was highly successful, selling so much coffee that it was played for
years in several versions. But why should this commercial prove so effective? Why on earth would we take Robert Young’s word for the
health consequences of decaffeinated coffee? Because—as the advertising
agency that hired him knew perfectly well—he is associated in the
minds of the American public with Marcus Welby, M.D., the role he
played in an earlier long-running television series. Objectively it doesn’t
make sense to be swayed by the comments of a man we know to be just
an actor who used to play a doctor. But, as a practical matter, that man
moved the Sanka.

CONNOTATION, NOT CONTENT
From the first time I saw it, the most intriguing feature for me in the
Robert Young Sanka commercial was its ability to use the influence of
the authority principle without ever providing a real authority. The
appearance of authority was enough. This tells us something important
about unthinking reactions to authority figures. When in a click, whirr
mode, we are often as vulnerable to the symbols of authority as to the
substance.
There are several kinds of symbols that can reliably trigger our compliance in the absence of the genuine substance of authority. Consequently, they are employed extensively by those compliance profes-

166 / Influence
sionals who are short on substance. Con artists, for example, drape
themselves with the titles, clothes, and trappings of authority. They
love nothing more than to emerge elegantly dressed from a fine automobile and to introduce themselves to their prospective “mark” as
Doctor or Judge or Professor or Commissioner Someone. They understand that when they are so equipped, their chances for compliance are
greatly increased. Each of these three types of symbols of authority has
its own story and is worth a separate look.

Titles
Titles are simultaneously the most difficult and the easiest symbols of
authority to acquire. To earn one normally takes years of work and
achievement. Yet it is possible for somebody who has put in none of
this effort to adopt the mere label and receive a kind of automatic deference. As we have seen, TV-commercial actors and con artists do it successfully all the time.
I recently talked with a friend—a faculty member at a well-known
eastern university—who provided a telling illustration of how our actions are frequently more influenced by a title than by the nature of the
person claiming it. My friend travels quite a bit and often finds himself
chatting with strangers in bars, restaurants, and airports. He says that
he has learned through much experience never to use his title—professor—during these conversations. When he does, he reports, the tenor of
the interaction changes immediately. People who have been spontaneous
and interesting conversation partners for the prior half hour become
respectful, accepting, and dull. His opinions that earlier might have
produced a lively exchange now usually generate extended (and highly
grammatical) statements of accord. Annoyed and slightly bewildered
by the phenomenon—because, as he says, “I’m still the same guy they’ve
been talking to for the past thirty minutes, right?”—my friend now
regularly lies about his occupation in such situations.
What a refreshing shift from the more typical pattern in which certain
compliance practitioners lie about titles they don’t truly have. In either
direction, however, such practiced dishonesty makes the same point
about the sufficiency of a mere symbol of authority to influence behavior.
I wonder whether my professor friend—who is physically somewhat
short—would be so eager to hide his title if he knew that, besides
making strangers more accommodating, it also makes them see him as
taller. Studies investigating the way in which authority status affects
perceptions of size have found that prestigious titles lead to height
distortions. In one experiment conducted on five classes of Australian

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 167
college students, a man was introduced as a visitor from Cambridge
University in England. However, his status at Cambridge was represented differently in each of the classes. To one class, he was presented
as a student; to a second class, a demonstrator; to another, a lecturer;
to yet another, a senior lecturer; to a fifth, a professor. After he left the
room, each class was asked to estimate his height. It was found that
with each increase in status, the same man grew in perceived height by
an average of a half inch, so that as the “professor” he was seen as two
and a half inches taller than as the “student.”5
It is worth the time of a small detour to pursue this interesting connection between status and perceived size, since it shows up in a variety
of ways. In judging the size of coins, for example, children most overestimate the size of the more valuable coins. And adults are just as guilty
of such distortions. In one study, college students drew cards that had
monetary values printed on them ranging from $3.00 to –$3.00; they
won or lost the amount shown on the cards they picked. Afterward,
they were asked to rate the size of each card. Even though all cards
were exactly the same size, those that had the more extreme values—positive or negative—were seen as physically larger. Thus it is not necessarily the pleasantness of a thing that makes it seem bigger to us, it is
its importance.6
Because we see size and status as related, it is possible for certain individuals to benefit by substituting the former for the latter. In some
animal societies, where the status of a male is assigned on the basis of
dominance, size is an important factor in determining which male will
achieve which status level in the group.7 Usually, in combat with a
rival, the larger and more powerful male wins. To avoid the harmful
effects to the group of such physical conflict, however, many species
have adopted methods that frequently involve more form than fracas.
The two males confront each other with showy aggression displays that
invariably include size-enhancing tricks. Various mammals arch their
backs and bristle their coats; fish extend their fins and puff themselves
up with water; birds unfurl and flutter their wings. Very often, this exhibition alone is enough to send one of the histrionic warriors into retreat, leaving the contested status position to his seemingly larger and
stronger rival.
Fur, fins, and feathers. Isn’t it interesting how these most delicate of
parts can be exploited to give the impression of substance and weight?
There are two lessons for us here. One is specific to the association
between size and status. The connection of those two things can be
profitably employed by individuals who are able to fake the first to
gain the appearance of the second. This is precisely why con men, even

168 / Influence
those of average or slightly above-average height, commonly wear lifts
in their shoes.
The other lesson is more general: The outward signs of power and
authority frequently may be counterfeited with the flimsiest of materials.
Let’s return to the realm of titles for an example—an example that involves what, in several ways, is the scariest experiment I know. A group
of researchers, composed of doctors and nurses with connections to
three midwestern hospitals, became increasingly concerned with the
extent of mechanical obedience to doctors’ orders on the part of nurses.
It seemed to the researchers that even highly trained and skilled nurses
were not using that training or skill sufficiently to check on a doctor’s
judgment; instead, when confronted with a physician’s directives, they
would simply defer.
Earlier, we saw how this process accounted for the case of the rectally
administered ear drops. But the midwestern researchers took things
several steps further. First, they wanted to find out whether such cases
were isolated incidents or representative of a widespread phenomenon.
Second, they wanted to examine the problem in the context of a serious
treatment error—the gross overprescription of an unauthorized drug
to a hospital patient. Finally, they wanted to see what would happen
if they physically removed the authority figure from the situation and
substituted an unfamiliar voice on the phone, offering only the frailest
evidence of authority—the claimed title “doctor.”
To twenty-two separate nurses’ stations on various surgical, medical,
pediatric, and psychiatric wards, one of the researchers made an
identical phone call in which he identified himself as a hospital physician
and directed the answering nurse to give twenty milligrams of a drug
(Astrogen) to a specific ward patient. There were four excellent reasons
for a nurse’s caution in response to this order: (1) The prescription was
transmitted by phone, in direct violation of hospital policy. (2) The
medication itself was unauthorized; Astrogen had not been cleared for
use nor placed on the ward stock list. (3) The prescribed dosage was
obviously and dangerously excessive. The medication containers clearly
stated that the “maximum daily dose” was only ten milligrams, half of
what had been ordered. (4) The directive was given by a man the nurse
had never met, seen, or even talked with before on the phone. Yet, in
95 percent of the instances, the nurses went straightaway to the ward
medicine cabinet, where they secured the ordered dosage of Astrogen
and started for the patient’s room to administer it. It was at this point
that they were stopped by a secret observer, who revealed the nature
of the experiment.
The results are frightening, indeed. That 95 percent of regular staff
nurses complied unhesitatingly with a patently improper instruction

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 169
of this sort must give us all great reason for concern as potential hospital
patients. Given the recent U.S. Health Care Financing Administration
estimate of a 12 percent daily-medication error rate in American hospitals, stays of longer than a week make it likely that we will be recipients
of such an error. What the midwestern study shows is that the mistakes
are hardly limited to trivial slips in the administration of harmless ear
drops or the like, but extend to grave and dangerous blunders.
In interpreting their unsettling findings, the researchers came to an
instructive conclusion:
In a real-life situation corresponding to the experimental one, there
would, in theory, be two professional intelligences, the doctor’s
and the nurse’s, working to ensure that a given procedure be undertaken in a manner beneficial to the patient or, at the very least,
not detrimental to him. The experiment strongly suggests, however, that one of these intelligences is, for all practical purposes,
nonfunctioning.8
It seems that, in the face of a physician’s directives, the nurses unhooked their “professional intelligences” and moved to a click, whirr
form of responding. None of their considerable medical training or
knowledge was engaged in the decision of what to do. Instead, because
obedience to legitimate authority had always been the most preferred
and efficient action in their work setting, they had become willing to
err on the side of automatic obedience. It is all the more instructive that
they had traveled so far in this direction that their error had come not
in response to genuine authority but to its most easily falsified symbol—a bare title.9

Clothes
A second kind of authority symbol that can trigger our mechanical
compliance is clothing. Though more tangible than a title, the cloak of
authority is every bit as fakable. Police bunco files bulge with records
of con artists whose artistry includes the quick change. In chameleon
style, they adopt the hospital white, priestly black, army green, or police
blue that the situation requires for maximum advantage. Only too late
do their victims realize that the garb of authority is hardly its guarantee.
A series of studies by social psychologist Leonard Bickman gives an
indication of how difficult it can be to resist requests that come from
figures in authority attire. Bickman’s basic procedure was to ask passersby on the street to comply with some sort of odd request (to pick up
a discarded paper bag, to stand on the other side of a bus-stop sign). In
half of the instances, the requester—a young man—was dressed in

170 / Influence
normal street clothes; the rest of the time, he was dressed in a security
guard’s uniform. Regardless of the type of request, many more people
obeyed the requester when he wore the guard costume.
Especially revealing was one version of the experiment in which the
requester stopped pedestrians and pointed to a man standing by a
parking meter fifty feet away. The requester, whether dressed normally
or as a security guard, always said the same thing to the pedestrian:
“You see that guy over there by the meter? He’s overparked but doesn’t
have any change. Give him a dime!” The requester then turned a corner
and walked away so that by the time the pedestrian reached the meter,
the requester was out of sight. The power of his uniform lasted, however, even after he was long gone: Nearly all the pedestrians complied
with his directive when he had worn the guard costume, but fewer than
half did so when he had dressed normally. It is interesting to note that
later on, Bickman found college students able to guess with considerable
accuracy the percentage of compliance that had occurred in the experiment when the requester wore street clothes (50 percent vs. the actual
42 percent); yet the students greatly underestimated the percentage of
compliance when he was in uniform (63 percent vs. the actual 92 percent).10
Less blatant in its connotation than a uniform, but nonetheless effective, is another kind of attire that has traditionally bespoken authority
status in our culture: the well-tailored business suit. It, too, can evoke
a telling form of deference from total strangers. Research conducted in
Texas, for instance, arranged for a thirty-one-year-old man to violate
the law by crossing the street against the traffic light on a variety of
occasions. In half of the cases, he was dressed in a freshly pressed
business suit and tie; on the other occasions, he wore a work shirt and
trousers. The researchers watched from a distance and counted the
number of pedestrians waiting at the corner who followed the man
across the street. Like the children of Hamelin who crowded after the
Pied Piper, three and a half times as many people swept into traffic
behind the suited jaywalker. In this case, though, the magic came not
from his pipe but his pinstripes.11
It is noteworthy that the two types of authority apparel shown by
the above research to be influential—the guard uniform and business
suit—are combined deftly by confidence men in a fraud called the bankexaminer scheme. The target of the swindle can be anyone, but elderly
persons living alone are preferred. The con begins when a man dressed
in a properly conservative three-piece business suit appears at the door
of a likely victim. Everything about his clothing sends a message of
propriety and respectability. The white shirt is starched; the wing-tip
shoes glow deeply. His suit is not trendy but classic: The lapels are three

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 171
inches wide—no more, no less; the cloth is heavy and substantial, even
in July; the tones are muted, business blue, business gray, business
black.
He explains to his intended victim—perhaps a widow he secretly
followed home from the bank a day or two earlier—that he is a professional bank examiner who, in the course of auditing the books of her
bank, has found some seeming irregularities. He thinks he has spotted
the culprit, a bank officer who is regularly doctoring reports of transactions in certain accounts. He says that the widow’s account may be one
of these, but he can’t be sure until he has hard evidence. Therefore, he
has come to ask for her cooperation. Would she help out by withdrawing
her savings so a team of examiners and responsible bank officials can
trace the record of the transaction as it passes across the suspect’s desk?
Often the appearance and presentation of the “bank examiner” are
so impressive that the victim never thinks to check on their validity
with even a simple phone call. Instead, she drives to the bank, withdraws all her money, and returns home with it to wait with the “examiner” for word on the success of the trap. When the message comes, it
is delivered by a uniformed bank guard, who arrives after closing hours
to announce that all is well—apparently the widow’s account was not
one of those being tampered with. Greatly relieved, the “examiner”
offers gracious thanks and, since the bank is now conveniently closed,
instructs the guard to return the lady’s money to the vault, to save her
the trouble of doing so the next day. With smiles and handshakes all
around, the guard takes the funds and leaves the “examiner” to express
a few more minutes of thanks before he, too, exits. Naturally, as the
victim eventually discovers, the “guard” is no more a guard than the
“examiner” is an examiner. What they are is a pair of bunco artists who
have recognized the capacity of carefully counterfeited uniforms to
click us into mesmerized compliance with “authority.”

Trappings
Aside from its function in uniforms, clothing can symbolize a more
generalized type of authority when it serves an ornamental purpose.
Finely styled and expensive clothes carry an aura of status and position,
as do trappings such as jewelry and cars. The last of these status symbols
is particularly interesting in the United States, where “the American
love affair with the automobile” gives it unusual significance.
According to the findings of a study done in the San Francisco Bay
area, owners of prestige autos receive a special kind of deference from
us. The experimenters discovered that motorists would wait significantly
longer before honking their horns at a new, luxury car stopped in front

172 / Influence
of a green traffic light than at an older, economy model. The motorists
had little patience with the economy-car driver: Nearly all sounded
their horns, and the majority of these did so more than once; two simply
rammed into his rear bumper. So intimidating was the aura of the
prestige automobile, however, that 50 percent of the motorists waited
respectfully behind it, never touching their horns, until it drove on.12
Later on, the researchers asked college students what they would
have done in such situations. Compared to the true findings of the experiment, the students consistently underestimated the time it would
take them to honk at the luxury car. The male students were especially
inaccurate, feeling that they would honk faster at the prestige- than the
economy-car driver; of course, the study itself showed just the opposite.
Note the similarity of this pattern to much other research on authority
pressures. As in Milgram’s research, the midwestern hospital-nurses’
study, and the security-guard-uniform experiment, people were unable
to predict correctly how they or others would react to authority influence. In each instance, the effect of such influence was grossly underestimated. This property of authority status may account for much of its
success as a compliance device. Not only does it work forcefully on us,
but it also does so unexpectedly.

HOW TO SAY NO
One protective tactic we can use against authority status is to remove
its element of surprise. Because we typically misperceive the profound
impact of authority (and its symbols) on our actions, we are at the disadvantage of being insufficiently cautious about its presence in compliance situations. A fundamental form of defense against this problem,
therefore, is a heightened awareness of authority power. When this
awareness is coupled with a recognition of how easily authority symbols
can be faked, the benefit will be a properly guarded approach to situations involving authority-influence attempts.
Sounds simple, right? And in a way it is. A better understanding of
the workings of authority influence should help us resist it. Yet there
is a perverse complication—the familiar one inherent in all weapons of
influence: We shouldn’t want to resist altogether, or even most of the
time. Generally, authority figures know what they are talking about.
Physicians, judges, corporate executives, legislative leaders, and the
like have typically gained their positions because of superior knowledge
and judgment. Thus, as a rule, their directives offer excellent counsel.
The trick is to be able to recognize without much strain or vigilance
when authority promptings are best followed and when they should
be resisted.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 173
Posing two questions to ourselves can help enormously to accomplish
this trick. The first is to ask, when we are confronted with what appears
to be an authority figure’s influence attempt, “Is this authority truly an
expert?” The question is helpful because it focuses our attention on a
pair of crucial pieces of information: the authority’s credentials and the
relevance of those credentials to the topic at hand. By orienting in this
simple way toward the evidence for authority status, we can avoid the
major pitfalls of automatic deference. An illustration or two is in order.
Let’s examine the highly successful Robert Young Sanka-coffee
commercial in this light. If, rather than responding to his “Marcus
Welby, M.D.” association, people had focused on Mr. Young’s actual
status as an authority, I am confident that the commercial would not
have had so long and productive a run. Obviously, Robert Young does
not possess a physician’s training or knowledge. We all know that.
What he does possess, however, is a physician’s title, “M.D.” Now,
clearly, it is an empty title, connected to him in our minds through the
device of playacting. We all know that, too. But isn’t it fascinating how,
when we are whirring along, what is obvious often doesn’t matter unless
we pay specific attention to it?
That is why the “Is this authority truly an expert?” question can be
so valuable: It brings our attention to the obvious. It channels us effortlessly away from a focus on possibly meaningless symbols to a consideration of genuine authority credentials. What’s more, the question
impels us to distinguish between relevant authorities and irrelevant
authorities. And this is a distinction that is easy to forget when the push
of authority pressure is combined with the rush of modern life. The
Texas pedestrians who bustled into city traffic behind a business-suited
jaywalker offer a prime example. Even if the man had been the business
authority his clothes suggested he might be, he was unlikely to be a
greater authority on crossing the street than other people, including
those who followed him into traffic.
Still, they did follow, as if his label, “authority,” overwhelmed the
vital difference between relevant and irrelevant forms. Had they
bothered to ask themselves whether he represented a true expert in the
situation, someone whose actions reflected superior knowledge there,
I expect the result would have been quite different. The same process
applies to Robert Young, a man who is not without expertise. He has
fashioned a long career with many achievements in a difficult business.
But his skills and knowledge are as an actor, not a doctor. When, in
viewing the famous coffee commercial, we focus on his true credentials,
we will realize quickly that he should be no more believed than any
other successful actor who claims that Sanka is healthy.

174 / Influence
Suppose, though, we are confronted with an authority we determine
is a relevant expert. Before submitting to authority influence, it would
be wise to ask a second simple question: “How truthful can we expect
the expert to be here?” Authorities, even the best informed, may not
present their information honestly to us. Therefore we need to consider
their trustworthiness in the situation. In fact, most of the time, we do.
We allow ourselves to be much more swayed by experts who seem to
be impartial than by those who have something to gain by convincing
us; and this has been shown by research to be true around the world.13
By wondering how an expert stands to benefit from our compliance,
we give ourselves another safety net against undue and automatic influence. Even knowledgeable authorities in a field will not persuade
us until we are satisfied that their messages represent the facts faithfully.
When asking ourselves about such a person’s trustworthiness, we
should keep in mind a little tactic compliance practitioners often use
to assure us of their sincerity: They will seem to argue to a degree against
their own interests. Correctly done, this can be a subtly effective device
for proving their honesty. Perhaps they will mention a small shortcoming in their position or product (“Oh, the disadvantages of Benson &
Hedges”). Invariably, though, the drawback will be a secondary one
that is easily overcome by more significant advantages—“Listerine, the
taste you hate three times a day”; “Avis: We’re number two, but we try
harder”; “L’Oral, a bit more expensive and worth it.” By establishing
their basic truthfulness on minor issues, the compliance professionals
who use this ploy can then be more believable when stressing the important aspects of their argument.14
I have seen this approach used with devastating effect in a place that
few of us recognize as a compliance setting: the restaurant. It is no secret
that because of shamelessly low wages, servers in restaurants must
supplement their earnings with tips. Leaving the sine qua non of good
service aside, the most successful waiters and waitresses know certain
tricks for increasing tips. They also know that the larger a customer’s
bill, the larger the amount of money likely to come to them in a standard
gratuity. In these two regards, then—building the size of the customer’s
charge and building the percentage of that charge that is given as a
tip—servers regularly act as compliance agents.
Hoping to find out how they operate, I applied for waiter openings
at several fairly expensive restaurants. Without experience, though, the
best I could do was to land a busboy job that, as things turned out,
provided me a propitious vantage point from which to watch and
analyze the action. Before long, I realized what the other employees
already knew—that the most successful waiter in the place was Vincent,

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 175
who somehow arranged for patrons to order more and tip higher than
for anyone else; in fact, the other servers were not even close to him in
weekly earnings.
So I began to linger in my duties around Vincent’s tables to observe
his style. I quickly learned that his style was to have no single style. He
had a repertoire of them, each ready to be called on under the appropriate circumstances. When the customers were a family, he was effervescent—even slightly clownish—directing his remarks as often to the
children as to the adults. With a young couple on a date, he became
formal and a bit imperious in an attempt to intimidate the young man
(to whom he spoke exclusively) into ordering and tipping lavishly.
With an older, married couple, he retained the formality but dropped
the superior air in favor of a respectful orientation to both members of
the couple. Should the patron be dining alone, Vincent selected a
friendly demeanor—cordial, conversational, and warm.
But Vincent reserved the trick of seeming to argue against his own
interests for large parties of eight to twelve people. Here his technique
was veined with genius. When it was time for the first person, normally
a lady, to order, he went into his act. No matter what she selected,
Vincent reacted identically: His brow furrowed, his hand hovered above
his order pad, and after looking quickly over his shoulder for the
manager, he leaned conspiratorially toward the table to report for all
to hear, “I’m afraid that is not as good tonight as it normally is. Might
I recommend instead the____or the____?” (Here Vincent suggested a
pair of menu items that were fifty cents or so less expensive than the
dish the patron had selected initially.) “They are both excellent tonight.”
With this single maneuver, Vincent engaged several important principles of influence. First, even those who did not take his suggestions
felt that Vincent had done them a favor by offering valuable information
to help them order. Everyone felt grateful, and consequently the rule
for reciprocity would work in his favor when it came time to decide on
his gratuity. But besides hiking the percentage of his tip, Vincent’s
maneuver also placed him in a favorable position to increase the size
of the table’s order. It established him as an authority on the current
stores of the house; he clearly knew what was and wasn’t good that
night. Moreover—and this is where seeming to argue against his own
interests came in—it proved him to be a trustworthy informant, because
he recommended dishes that were slightly less expensive than originally
ordered. Rather than trying to line his own pockets, he seemed to have
the customers’ best interests at heart.
To all appearances, he was at once knowledgeable and honest, a
combination that gave him great credibility. And Vincent was quick to
exploit the advantage of this credible image. When the party had fin-

176 / Influence
ished giving their food orders, he would say, “Very well, and would
you like me to suggest or select some wine to go with your meals?” As
I watched the scene repeated almost nightly, there was a notable consistency to the customers’ reactions—smiles, nods, and for the most
part, general assent.
Even from the distance of my vantage point, one could read their
thoughts from their faces. “Sure,” they seemed to say, “you know what’s
good here, and you’re obviously on our side. Tell us what to get.”
Looking pleased, Vincent, who did know his vintages, would respond
with some excellent (and costly) choices. He was similarly persuasive
when it came time for dessert decisions. Patrons who otherwise would
have passed up the dessert course or shared with a friend were swayed
to partake fully by Vincent’s rapturous descriptions of the Baked Alaska
and chocolate mousse. Who, after all, is more believable than a demonstrated expert of proven sincerity?
By combining the factors of reciprocity and credible authority into a
single, elegant maneuver, Vincent was able to inflate substantially both
the percentage of his tip and the base charge on which it was figured.
His proceeds from this trick were handsome, indeed. But notice that
much of his profit came from an apparent lack of concern for personal
profit. Seeming to argue against his financial interests served those interests extremely well.
READER’S REPORT

From a Young Businessman
“About two years ago, I was trying to sell my old car because I’d already
bought a new one. One day I passed a used-car lot with a sign reading,
WE WILL SELL YOUR CAR FOR MORE. Just what I wanted, I thought; so I
stopped in to talk with the owner. I told him I wanted to get about three
thousand dollars for my old car, and he said he thought I should be
asking for a lot more because it was worth at least thirty-five-hundred
dollars. This came as a real surprise to me, because the way their consignment system worked, the larger my asking price for the car, the
less money was left over for them to keep after they sold it to somebody.
Therefore, by telling me to ask for more than three thousand dollars,
they were cutting off their own profits. Just like your Vincent-the-waiter
example, they were seeming to argue against their own interests so I’d
see them as trustworthy authorities; but I didn’t realize this until much
later. Anyway, I went along with the owner’s idea that my car was
worth more than I’d first thought, and I set my asking price at thirtyfive-hundred dollars.
“After they’d had my car on their lot for a couple of days, they called

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 177
saying that someone was really interested in it, but that the price was
a little too high. Would I be willing to drop my price by two hundred
dollars to sell the car? Convinced that they had my interests at heart, I
agreed. The next day they called back to say the the buyer’s financing
had fallen through and that he couldn’t buy the car. In the next two
weeks, I got two more calls from the dealership, each asking me to drop
my price two hundred dollars to seal a sale to some customer. Both
times I OK’d it because I still believed they were trustworthy. But each
time, the alleged deal fell through. I was suspicious enough to call a
friend whose family was in the car business. He said this was an old
trick designed to get sellers like me to reduce their asking prices to super
low levels, giving the dealership big profits when they finally sold the
car.
“So, I went over there and took my car. As I was leaving, they were
still trying to persuade me to let them keep it because they had a ‘hot
prospect’ who they were sure would buy it if I’d only knock off another
two hundred dollars.”
Once again in a Reader’s Report we can see the influence of the contrast
principle combining with the principle of primary interest. In this case,
after the thirty-five-hundred-dollar figure was set, each
two-hundred-dollar nick seemed small by comparison.

Chapter 7
SCARCITY
The Rule of the Few
The way to love anything is to realize that it might be lost.
—G. K. CHESTERTON

where
T I live. Perhaps the most notable features of Mesa are its sizable
HE CITY OF MESA, ARIZONA, IS A SUBURB IN THE PHOENIX AREA

Mormon population—next to that of Salt Lake City, the largest in the
world—and a huge Mormon temple located on exquisitely kept grounds
in the center of the city. Although I had appreciated the landscaping
and architecture from a distance, I had never been interested enough
in the temple to go inside until the day I read a newspaper article that
told of a special inner sector of Mormon temples to which no one has
access but faithful members of the Church. Even potential converts
must not see it. There is one exception to the rule, however. For a few
days immediately after a temple is newly constructed, nonmembers
are allowed to tour the entire structure, including the otherwise restricted section.
The newspaper story reported that the Mesa temple had recently
been refurbished and that the renovations had been extensive enough
to classify it as “new” by Church standards. Thus, for the next several
days only, non-Mormon visitors could see the temple area traditionally
banned to them. I remember quite well the effect of the article on me:
I immediately resolved to take a tour. But when I phoned a friend to
ask if he wanted to come along, I came to understand something that
changed my decision just as quickly.
After declining the invitation, my friend wondered why I seemed so

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 179
intent on a visit. I was forced to admit that, no, I had never been inclined
toward the idea of a temple tour before, that I had no questions about
the Mormon religion I wanted answered, that I had no general interest
in the architecture of houses of worship, and that I expected to find
nothing more spectacular or stirring than I might see at a number of
other temples, churches, or cathedrals in the area. It became clear as I
spoke that the special lure of the temple had a sole cause: If I did not
experience the restricted sector shortly, I would never again have the
chance. Something that, on its own merits, held little appeal for me had
become decidedly more attractive merely because it would soon become
unavailable.
Since that encounter with the scarcity principle—that opportunities
seem more valuable to us when their availability is limited—I have
begun to notice its influence over a whole range of my actions. For instance, I routinely will interrupt an interesting face-to-face conversation
to answer the ring of an unknown caller. In such a situation, the caller
has a compelling feature that my face-to-face partner does not: potential
unavailability. If I don’t take the call, I might miss it (and the information
it carries) for good. Never mind that the ongoing conversation may be
highly engaging or important—much more than I could reasonably
expect an average phone call to be. With each unanswered ring, the
phone interaction becomes less retrievable. For that reason and for that
moment, I want it more than the other.
The idea of potential loss plays a large role in human decision making.
In fact, people seem to be more motivated by the thought of losing
something than by the thought of gaining something of equal value.
For instance, homeowners told how much money they could lose from
inadequate insulation are more likely to insulate their homes than those
told how much money they could save. Similar results have been obtained by health researchers: Pamphlets urging young women to check
for breast cancer through self-examinations are significantly more successful if they state their case in terms of what stands to be lost (e.g.,
“You can lose several potential health benefits by failing to spend only
five minutes each month doing breast self-examination”) rather than
gained (e.g., “You can gain several potential health benefits by spending
only five minutes each month doing breast self-examination”).1
Collectors of everything from baseball cards to antiques are keenly
aware of the influence of the scarcity principle in determining the worth
of an item. As a rule, if it is rare or becoming rare, it is more valuable.
Especially enlightening as to the importance of scarcity in the collectibles
market is the phenomenon of the “precious mistake.” Flawed items—a
blurred stamp or a double-struck coin—are sometimes the most valued

180 / Influence
of all. Thus a stamp carrying a three-eyed likeness of George Washington
is anatomically incorrect, aesthetically unappealing, and yet highly
sought after. There is instructive irony here: Imperfections that would
otherwise make for rubbish make for prized possessions when they
bring along an abiding scarcity.
With the scarcity principle operating so powerfully on the worth we
assign things, it is natural that compliance professionals will do some
related operating of their own. Probably the most straightforward use
of the scarcity principle occurs in the “limited-number” tactic, when
the customer is informed that a certain product is in short supply that
cannot be guaranteed to last long. During the time I was researching
compliance strategies by infiltrating various organizations, I saw the
limited-number tactic employed repeatedly in a range of situations:
“There aren’t more than five convertibles with this engine left in the
state. And when they’re gone, that’s it, ’cause we’re not making ’em
anymore.” “This is one of only two unsold corner lots in the entire development. You wouldn’t want the other one; it’s got a nasty east-west
exposure.” “You may want to think seriously about buying more than
one case today because production is backed way up and there’s no
telling when we’ll get any more in.”
Sometimes the limited-number information was true, sometimes it
was wholly false. But in each instance, the intent was to convince customers of an item’s scarcity and thereby increase its immediate value
in their eyes. I admit to developing a grudging admiration for the
practitioners who made this simple device work in a multitude of ways
and styles. I was most impressed, however, with a particular version
that extended the basic approach to its logical extreme by selling a piece
of merchandise at its scarcest point—when it seemingly could no longer
be had. The tactic was played to perfection in one appliance store I investigated, where 30 to 50 percent of the stock was regularly listed as
on sale. Suppose a couple in the store seemed from a distance to be
moderately interested in a certain sale item. There are all sorts of cues
that tip off such interest—closer-than-normal examination of the appliance, a casual look at any instruction booklets associated with the appliance, discussions held in front of the appliance, but no attempt to
seek out a salesperson for further information. After observing the
couple so engaged, a salesperson might approach and say, “I see you’re
interested in this model here, and I can understand why; it’s a great
machine at a great price. But, unfortunately, I sold it to another couple
not more than twenty minutes ago. And, if I’m not mistaken, it was the
last one we had.”
The customers’ disappointment registers unmistakably. Because of
its lost availability, the appliance jumps suddenly in attractiveness.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 181
Typically, one of the customers asks if there is any chance that an unsold
model still exists in the store’s back room, warehouse, or other location.
“Well,” the salesperson allows, “that is possible, and I’d be willing to
check. But do I understand that this is the model you want and if I can
get it for you at this price, you’ll take it?” Therein lies the beauty of the
technique. In accord with the scarcity principle, the customers are asked
to commit to buying the appliance when it looks least available—and
therefore most desirable. Many customers do agree to a purchase at
this singularly vulnerable time. Thus, when the salesperson (invariably)
returns with the news that an additional supply of the appliance has
been found, it is also with a pen and sales contract in hand. The information that the desired model is in good supply may actually make some
customers find it less attractive again.2 But by then, the business transaction has progressed too far for most people to renege. The purchase
decision made and committed to publicly at an earlier, crucial point
still holds. They buy.
Related to the limited-number technique is the “deadline” tactic, in
which some official time limit is placed on the customer’s opportunity
to get what the compliance professional is offering. Much like my experience with the Mormon temple’s inner sanctum, people frequently
find themselves doing what they wouldn’t particularly care to do simply
because the time to do so is shrinking. The adept merchandiser makes
this tendency pay off by arranging and publicizing customer deadlines—witness the collage of such newspaper ads in Figure 7–3—that
generate interest where none may have existed before. Concentrated
instances of this approach often occur in movie advertising. In fact, I
recently noticed that one theater owner, with remarkable singleness of
purpose, had managed to invoke the scarcity principle three separate
times in just five words that read, “Exclusive, limited engagement ends
soon!”

Swindled
By Peter Kerr
New York Times
NEW YORK—Daniel Gulban doesn’t remember how his life savings disappeared.
He remembers the smooth voice of a salesman on the telephone. He remembers
dreaming of a fortune in oil and silver futures. But to this day, the 81-year-old retired
utility worker does not understand how swindlers convinced him to part with
$18,000.
“I just wanted to better my life in my waning days,” said Gulban, a resident of

182 / Influence
Holder, Fla. “But when I found out the truth, I couldn’t eat or sleep. I lost 30 pounds.
I still can’t believe I would do anything like that.”
Gulban was the victim of a what law enforcement officials call a “boiler-room
operation,” a ruse that often involves dozens of fast-talking telephone salesmen
crammed into a small room where they call thousands of customers each day. The
companies snare hundreds of millions of dollars each year from unsuspecting
customers, according to a U.S. Senate subcommittee on investigations, which issued
a report on the subject last year.
“They use an impressive Wall Street address, lies and deception to get individuals
to sink their money into various glamorous-sounding schemes,” said Robert Abrams,
the New York State attorney general, who has pursued more than a dozen boilerroom cases in the past four years. “The victims are sometimes persuaded to invest
the savings of a lifetime.”
Orestes J. Mihaly, the New York assistant attorney general in charge of the bureau
of investor protection and securities, said the companies often operate in three
stages. First, Mihaly said, comes the “opening call,” in which a salesman identifies
himself as representing a company with an impressive-sounding name and address.
He will simply ask the potential customer to receive the company’s literature.
A second call involves a sales pitch, Mihaly said. The salesman first describes
the great profits to be made and then tells the customer that it is no longer possible
to invest. The third call gives the customer a chance to get in on the deal, he said,
and is offered with a great deal of urgency.
“The idea is to dangle a carrot in front of the buyer’s face and then take it away,”
Mihaly said. “The aim is to get someone to want to buy quickly, without thinking
too much about it.” Sometimes, Mihaly said, the salesman will be out of breath on
the third call and will tell the customer that he “just came off the trading floor.”
Such tactics convinced Gulban to part with his life savings. In 1979, a stranger
called him repeatedly and convinced Gulban to wire $1,756 to New York to purchase
silver, Gulban said. After another series of telephone calls the salesman cajoled
Gulban into wiring more than $6,000 for crude oil. He eventually wired an additional $9,740, but his profits never arrived.
“My heart sank,” Gulban recalled. “I was not greedy. I just hoped I would see
better days.” Gulban never recouped his losses.
FIGURE 7-2
The Scarcity Scam
Note how the scarcity principle was employed during the second and
third phone calls
to cause Mr. Gulban to “buy quickly without thinking too much about
it.” Click, blur.
(PETER KERR, THE NEW YORK TIMES)

A variant of the deadline tactic is much favored by some face-to-face,

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 183
high-pressure sellers because it carries the purest form of decision
deadline: right now. Customers are often told that unless they make an
immediate decision to buy, they will have to purchase the item at a
higher price or they will be unable to purchase it at all. A prospective
health-club member or automobile buyer might learn that the deal
offered by the salesperson is good only for that one time; should the
customer leave the premises, the deal is off. One large child-portrait
photography company urges parents to buy as many poses and copies
as they can afford because “stocking limitations force us to burn the
unsold pictures of your children within twenty-four hours.” A door-todoor magazine solicitor might say that salespeople are in the customer’s
area for just a day; after that, they—and the customer’s chance to buy
their magazine package—will be long gone. A home vacuum-cleaner
operation I infiltrated instructed its sales trainees to claim, “I have so
many other people to see that I have the time to visit a family only once.
It’s company policy that even if you decide later that you want this
machine, I can’t come back and sell it to you.” This, of course, is nonsense; the company and its representatives are in the business of making
sales, and any customer who called for another visit would be accommodated gladly. As the company sales manager impressed on his
trainees, the true purpose of the can’t-come-back claim has nothing to
do with reducing overburdened sales schedules. It is to “keep the prospects from taking the time to think the deal over by scaring them into
believing they can’t have it later, which makes them want it now.”

PSYCHOLOGICAL REACTANCE
The evidence, then, is clear. Compliance practitioners’ reliance on
scarcity as a weapon of influence is frequent, wide-ranging, systematic,
and diverse. Whenever such is the case with a weapon of influence, we
can feel assured that the principle involved has notable power in directing human action. In the instance of the scarcity principle, that power
comes from two major sources. The first is familiar. Like the other
weapons of influence, the scarcity principle trades on our weakness for
shortcuts. The weakness is, as before, an enlightened one. In this case,
because we know that the things that are difficult to possess are typically
better than those that are easy to possess, we can often use an item’s
availability to help us quickly and correctly decide on its quality. Thus,
one reason for the potency of the scarcity principle is that, by following
it, we are usually and efficiently right.3

184 / Influence

FIGURE 7-3
Don’t Wait!
Last chance to read this now before you turn the page
(ROBERT B. CIALDINI)

In addition, there is a unique, secondary source of power within the
scarcity principle: As opportunities become less available, we lose
freedoms; and we hate to lose the freedoms we already have. This desire
to preserve our established prerogatives is the centerpiece of psychological reactance theory, developed by psychologist Jack Brehm to explain
the human response to diminishing personal control. According to the
theory, whenever free choice is limited or threatened, the need to retain
our freedoms makes us desire them (as well as the goods and services
associated with them) significantly more than previously. So when increasing scarcity—or anything else—interferes with our prior access to
some item, we will react against the interference by wanting and trying
to possess the item more than before.4
As simple as the kernel of the theory seems, its shoots and roots curl
extensively through much of the social environment. From the garden
of young love to the jungle of armed revolution to the fruits of the
marketplace, impressive amounts of our behavior can be explained by
examining for the tendrils of psychological reactance. Before beginning

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 185
such an examination, though, it would be helpful to know when people
first show the desire to fight against restrictions of their freedoms.
Child psychologists have traced the tendency back to the start of the
third year of life—a year independently identified as a problem by
parents and widely known to them as “the terrible twos.” Most parents
can attest to the development of a decidedly more contrary style in their
children around this period. Two-year-olds seem masters of the art of
resistance to outside, especially parental, pressure: Tell them one thing,
they do the opposite; give them one toy, they want another; pick them
up against their will, they wriggle and squirm to be put down; put them
down against their will, they claw and struggle to be carried.
One Virginia-based study nicely captured the terrible twos style
among boys who averaged twenty-four months in age. The boys accompanied their mothers into a room containing two equally attractive toys.
The toys were always arranged so that one stood next to a transparent
Plexiglas barrier and the other stood behind the barrier. For some of
the boys, the Plexiglas sheet was only a foot tall—forming no real barrier to the toy behind, since the boys could easily reach over the top.
For the other boys, however, the Plexiglas was two feet tall, effectively
blocking the boys’ access to one toy unless they went around the barrier.
The researchers wanted to see how quickly the toddlers would make
contact with the toys under these conditions. Their findings were clear.
When the barrier was too small to restrict access to the toy behind it,
the boys showed no special preference for either of the toys; on the average, the toy next to the barrier was touched just as quickly as the one
behind. But when the barrier was big enough to be a true obstacle, the
boys went directly to the obstructed toy, making contact with it three
times faster than with the unobstructed toy. In all, the boys in this study
demonstrated the classic terrible twos’ response to a limitation of their
freedom: outright defiance.5
Why should psychological reactance emerge at the age of two? Perhaps the answer has to do with a crucial change that most children go
through around this time. It is then that they first come to a full recognition of themselves as individuals. No longer do they view themselves
as mere extensions of the social milieu but rather as identifiable, singular, and separate.6 This developing concept of autonomy brings naturally
with it the concept of freedom. An independent being is one with
choices; and a child with the newfound realization that he or she is such
a being will want to explore the length and breadth of the options.
Perhaps we should be neither surprised nor distressed, then, when our
two-year-olds strain incessantly against our will. They have come to a
recent and exhilarating perspective on themselves as free-standing human entities. Vital questions of volition, entitlements, and control now

186 / Influence
need to be asked and answered within their small minds. The tendency
to fight for every liberty and against every restriction might be best
understood as a quest for information. By testing severely the limits of
their freedoms (and coincidentally, the patience of their parents), the
children are discovering where in their worlds they can expect to be
controlled and where they can expect to be in control. As we will see
later, the wise parent provides highly consistent information.
Although the terrible twos may be the most noticeable age of psychological reactance, we show the strong tendency to react against restrictions on our freedoms of action throughout our lives. One other age
does stand out, however, as a time when this tendency takes an especially rebellious form: teenage. Like the twos, this is a period characterized by an emerging sense of individuality. For teenagers, the emergence
is from the role of child, with all of its attendant parental control, and
toward the role of adult, with all of its attendant rights and duties. Not
surprisingly, adolescents tend to focus less on the duties than on the
rights they feel they have as young adults. Not surprisingly, again,
imposing traditional parental authority at these times is often counterproductive; the teenager will sneak, scheme, and fight to resist such
attempts at control.
Nothing illustrates the boomerang quality of parental pressure on
adolescent behavior quite so clearly as a phenomenon known as the
“Romeo and Juliet effect.” As we know, Romeo Montague and Juliet
Capulet were the ill-fated Shakespearean characters whose love was
doomed by a feud between their families. Defying all parental attempts
to keep them apart, the teenagers won a lasting union in their tragic act
of twin suicide, an ultimate assertion of free will.
The intensity of the couple’s feelings and actions has always been a
source of wonderment and puzzlement to observers of the play. How
could such inordinate devotion develop so quickly in a pair so young?
A romantic might suggest rare and perfect love. A social scientist,
though, might point to the role of parental interference and the psychological reactance it can produce. Perhaps the passion of Romeo and Juliet
was not initially so consuming that it transcended the extensive barriers
erected by the families. Perhaps, instead, it was fueled to a white heat
by the placement of those barriers. Could it be that had the youngsters
been left to their own devices, their inflamed devotion would have
amounted to no more than a flicker of puppy love?
Because the story is fiction, such questions are, of course, hypothetical,
and any answers to them are speculative. However, it is possible to ask
and answer with more certainty similar questions about modern-day
Romeos and Juliets. Do couples suffering parental interference react by

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 187
committing themselves more firmly to the partnership and falling more
deeply in love? According to a study done with 140 Colorado couples,
that is exactly what they do. In fact, the researchers found that although
parental interference was linked to some problems in the relationship—the partners viewed one another more critically and reported a
greater number of negative behaviors in the other—that interference
also made the pair feel greater love and desire for marriage. During the
course of the study, as parental interference intensified, so did the love
experience; and when the interference weakened, romantic feelings
actually cooled.7
Although the Romeo and Juliet effect among modern teenagers may
seem cute—to outside observers—other manifestations of teenage reactance can prove tragic. For more than a decade, the major message
of a massive advertising campaign for Virginia Slims cigarettes has
been that today’s women “have come a long way” from the old days
when they were required by social norms to be subdued, proper, and
ladylike. No longer, imply these ads, should a woman have to feel
bound by chauvinistic and outmoded constraints on her independence
and, pointedly, on her freedom to smoke cigarettes. Has the message
been successful in triggering defiance of the old strictures among the
target audience? One dismaying statistic suggests a lamentable answer:
During the lengthy duration of this campaign, the percentage of cigarette
smokers has risen in only one U.S. demographic group—teenage women.
For twos and teens, then, psychological reactance flows across the
broad surface of experience, always turbulent and forceful. For most
of the rest of us, the pool of reactant energy lies quiet and covered,
erupting geyserlike only on occasion. Still, these eruptions manifest
themselves in a variety of fascinating ways that are of interest not only
to the student of human behavior but to lawmakers and policymakers
as well.
For instance, there’s the odd case of Kennesaw, Georgia, the town
that enacted a law requiring every adult resident to own a gun and
ammunition, under penalty of six months in jail and a two-hundreddollar fine. All the features of the Kennesaw gun law make it a prime
target for psychological reactance: The freedom that the law restricts is
an important, long-standing one to which most American citizens feel
entitled. Furthermore, the law was passed by the Kennesaw City
Council with a minimum of public input. Reactance theory would
predict that under these circumstances few of the adults in the town of
fifty-four hundred would obey. Yet newspaper reports testified that
three to four weeks after passage of the law, firearms sales in Kennesaw
were—no pun intended—booming.

188 / Influence
How are we to make sense of this apparent contradiction of the reactance principle? By looking a bit more closely at those who were buying
Kennesaw’s guns. Interviews with Kennesaw store owners revealed
that the gun buyers were not town residents at all, but visitors, many
of them lured by publicity to purchase their initial gun in Kennesaw.
Donna Green, proprietor of a shop described in one newspaper article
as a virtual “grocery store of firearms,” summed it up: “Business is
great. But they’re almost all being bought by people from out of town.
We’ve only had two or three local people buy a gun to comply with the
law.” After passage of the law, then, gun buying had become a frequent
activity in Kennesaw, but not among those it was intended to cover;
they were massively noncompliant. Only those individuals whose
freedom in the matter had not been restricted by the law had the inclination to live by it.
A similar situation arose a decade earlier and several hundred miles
to the south of Kennesaw, when Dade County (containing Miami),
Florida, imposed an antiphosphate ordinance prohibiting the use—and
possession!—of laundry or cleaning products containing phosphates.
A study done to determine the social impact of the law discovered two
parallel reactions on the part of Miami residents. First, in what seems
a Florida tradition, many Miamians turned to smuggling. Sometimes
with neighbors and friends in large “soap caravans,” they drove to
nearby counties to load up on phosphate detergents. Hoarding quickly
developed; and in the rush of obsession that frequently characterizes
hoarders, families were reported to boast of twenty-year supplies of
phosphate cleaners.
The second reaction to the law was more subtle and more general
than the deliberate defiance of the smugglers and hoarders. Spurred
by the tendency to want what they could no longer have, the majority
of Miami consumers came to see phosphate cleaners as better products
than before. Compared to Tampa residents, who were not affected by
the Dade County ordinance, the citizens of Miami rated phosphate detergents as gentler, more effective in cold water, better whiteners and
fresheners, more powerful on stains. After passage of the law, they had
even come to believe that phosphate detergents poured more easily
than did the Tampa consumers.8
This sort of response is typical of individuals who have lost an established freedom and is crucial to an understanding of how psychological
reactance and scarcity work on us. When our freedom to have something
is limited, the item becomes less available, and we experience an increased desire for it. However, we rarely recognize that psychological
reactance has caused us to want the item more; all we know is that we
want it. Still, we need to make sense of our desire for the item, so we

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 189
begin to assign it positive qualities to justify the desire. After all, it is
natural to suppose that if one feels drawn to something, it is because
of the merit of the thing. In the case of the Dade County antiphosphate
law—and in other instances of newly restricted availability—that is a
faulty supposition. Phosphate detergents clean, whiten, and pour no
better after they are banned than before. We just assume they do because
we find that we desire them more.
The tendency to want what has been banned and therefore to presume
that it is more worthwhile is not limited to such commodities as laundry
soap. In fact, the tendency is not limited to commodities at all but extends to restrictions on information. In an age when the ability to acquire, store, and manage information is becoming increasingly the determinant of wealth and power, it is important to understand how we
typically react to attempts to censor or otherwise constrain our access
to information. Although much data exist on our reactions to various
kinds of potentially censorable material—media violence, pornography,
radical political rhetoric—there is surprisingly little evidence as to our
reactions to the act of censoring them. Fortunately, the results of the
few studies that have been done on the topic are highly consistent. Almost invariably, our response to the banning of information is a greater
desire to receive that information and a more favorable attitude toward
it than before the ban.9
The intriguing thing about the effects of censoring information is not
that audience members want to have the information more than they
did before; that seems natural. Rather, it is that they come to believe in
the information more, even though they haven’t received it. For example,
when University of North Carolina students learned that a speech opposing coed dorms on campus would be banned, they became more
opposed to the idea of coed dorms. Thus, without ever hearing the
speech, they became more sympathetic to its argument. This raises the
worrisome possibility that especially clever individuals holding a weak
or unpopular position can get us to agree with that position by arranging
to have their message restricted. The irony is that for such
people—members of fringe political groups, for example—the most
effective strategy may not be to publicize their unpopular views, but
to get those views officially censored and then to publicize the censorship. Perhaps the authors of this country’s Constitution were acting as
much as sophisticated social psychologists as staunch civil libertarians
when they wrote the remarkably permissive free-speech provision of
the First Amendment. By refusing to restrain freedom of speech, they
may have been attempting to minimize the chance that new political

190 / Influence
notions would win support via the irrational course of psychological
reactance.
Of course, political ideas are not the only kind that are susceptible to
restriction. Access to sexually relevant material is frequently limited.
Although not as sensational as the occasional police crackdowns on
“adult” bookstores and theaters, regular pressure is applied by parents
and by citizens’ groups to censor the sexual content of educational
material ranging from sex education and hygiene texts to books on the
shelves of school libraries. Both sides in the struggle seem to be well
intentioned, and the issues are not simple, since they involve such
matters as morality, art, parental control over the schools, and First
Amendment freedoms. But from a purely psychological point of view,
those favoring strict censorship may wish to examine closely the results
of a study done on Purdue University undergraduates.10 The students
were shown some advertisements for a novel. For half the students, the
advertising copy included the statement, “a book for adults only, restricted to those 21 years and over”; the other half of the students read about
no such age restriction on the book. When the researchers later asked
the students to indicate their feelings toward the book, they discovered
the same pair of reactions we have noted with other bans: Those who
learned of the age restriction (1) wanted to read the book more and (2)
believed that they would like the book more than did those who thought
their access to the book was unlimited.
It might be argued that although these results may be true for a small
sample of sexually inclined college students, they would not apply to
students in junior and senior high schools, where the sex curricula
battles are actually being waged. Two factors make me doubt such an
argument. First, developmental psychologists report that as a general
style, the desire to oppose adult control begins quite soon in adolescence,
around the start of the teenage years. Nonscientific observers have also
noted the early rise of these strong oppositional tendencies. Shakespeare,
scholars tell us, placed Romeo and Juliet at the ages of fifteen and thirteen years, respectively. Second, the pattern of reactions exhibited by
the Purdue students is not unique and thus can’t be attributed to any
great preoccupation with sex that college students may have. The pattern
is common to externally imposed restrictions in general. Limiting access
to the book had the same effects as did banning phosphate detergent
in Florida or censoring a speech in North Carolina: The people involved
came to want the restricted item more and, as a result, came to feel more
favorable toward it.
Those who support the official banning of sexually relevant materials
from school curricula have the avowed purpose of reducing the orientation of the society, especially its youth, toward eroticism. In the light

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 191
of the Purdue study and in the context of other research on the effects
of imposed restraints, one must wonder whether official censorship as
a means may not be antithetical to the goal. If we are to believe the implications of the research, then the censorship is likely to increase the
desire of students for sexual material and, consequently, to cause them
to view themselves as the kind of individuals who like such material.
The term “official censorship” usually makes us think of bans on
political or sexual material; yet there is another common sort of official
censorship that we don’t think of in the same way, probably because it
occurs after the fact. Often in a jury trial, a piece of evidence or testimony
will be introduced, only to be ruled inadmissi-ble by the presiding
judge, who may then admonish the jurors to disregard that evidence.
From this perspective, the judge may be viewed as a censor, though
the form of censorship is odd. The presentation of the information to
the jury is not banned—it’s too late for that—it’s the jury’s use of the
information that is banned. How effective are such instructions from a
judge? And is it possible that, for jury members who feel it is their right
to consider all the available information, declarations of inadmissibility
may actually cause psychological reactance, leading the jurors to use
the evidence to a greater extent?
These were some of the questions asked in a large-scale jury-research
project conducted by the University of Chicago Law School. One reason
the results of the Chicago jury project are informative is that the participants were individuals who were actually on jury duty at the time
and who agreed to be members of “experimental juries” formed by the
researchers. These experimental juries then heard tapes of evidence
from previous trials and deliberated as if they were deciding the case.
In the study most relevant to our interest in official censorship, thirty
such juries heard the case of a woman who was injured by a car driven
by a careless male defendant. The first finding of the study was no
surprise: When the driver said he had liability insurance, the jurors
awarded his victim an average of four thousand dollars more than when
he said he had no insurance (thirty-seven thousand dollars vs. thirtythree thousand dollars). Thus, as insurance companies have long suspected, juries make larger awards to victims if an insurance company
will have to pay. The second finding of the study is the fascinating one,
though. If the driver said he was insured and the judge ruled that
evidence inadmissible (directing the jury to disregard it), the instruction
to disregard had a boomerang effect, causing an average award of fortysix thousand dollars. So when certain juries learned that the driver was
insured, they increased the damage payment by four thousand dollars.
But when other juries were told officially that they must not use that
information, they used it still more, increasing the damage payment by

192 / Influence
thirteen thousand dollars. It appears, then, that even proper, official
censorship in a courtroom setting creates problems for the censor. We
react to information restriction there, as usual, by valuing the banned
information more than ever.11
The realization that we value limited information allows us to apply
the scarcity principle to realms beyond material commodities. The
principle works for messages, communications, and knowledge, too.
Taking this perspective, we can see that information may not have to
be censored for us to value it more; it need only be scarce. According
to the scarcity principle, then, we will find a piece of information more
persuasive if we think we can’t get it elsewhere. This idea that exclusive
information is more persuasive information is central to the thinking
of two psychologists, Timothy Brock and Howard Fromkin, who have
developed a “commodity theory” analysis of persuasion.12
The strongest support I know for Brock and Fromkin’s theory comes
from a small experiment done by a student of mine. At the time, the
student was also a successful businessman, the owner of a beef-importing company, who had returned to school to get advanced training in
marketing. After we talked in my office one day about scarcity and exclusivity of information, he decided to do a study using his sales staff.
The company’s customers—buyers for supermarkets or other retail
food outlets—were phoned as usual by a salesperson and asked for a
purchase in one of three ways. One set of customers heard a standard
sales presentation before being asked for their orders. Another set of
customers heard the standard sales presentation plus information that
the supply of imported beef was likely to be scarce in the upcoming
months. A third group received the standard sales presentation and
the information about a scarce supply of beef, too; however, they also
learned that the scarce-supply news was not generally available information—it had come, they were told, from certain exclusive contacts that
the company had. Thus the customers who received this last sales
presentation learned that not only was the availability of the product
limited, so also was the news concerning it—the scarcity double
whammy.
The results of the experiment quickly become apparent when the
company salespeople began to urge the owner to buy more beef because
there wasn’t enough in the inventory to keep up with all the orders
they were receiving. Compared to the customers who got only the
standard sales appeal, those who were also told about the future scarcity
of beef bought more than twice as much. But the real boost in sales occurred among the customers who heard of the impending scarcity via
“exclusive” information. They purchased six times the amount that the
customers who received only the standard sales pitch did. Apparently

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 193
the fact that the news carrying the scarcity of information was itself
scarce made it especially persuasive.13

OPTIMAL CONDITIONS
Much like the other effective weapons of influence, the scarcity principle
is more effective at some times than at other times. An important practical problem, then, is to find out when scarcity works best on us. A
great deal can be learned in this regard from an experiment devised by
social psychologist Stephen Worchel.14 The basic procedure used by
Worchel and his research team was simple: Participants in a consumerpreference study were given a chocolate-chip cookie from a jar and
asked to taste and rate its quality. For half of the raters, the jar contained
ten cookies; for the other half, it contained just two. As we might expect
from the scarcity principle, when the cookie was one of the only two
available, it was rated more favorably than when it was one of ten. The
cookie in short supply was rated as more desirable to eat in the future,
more attractive as a consumer item, and more costly than the identical
cookie in abundant supply.
Although this pattern of results provides a rather striking validation
of the scarcity principle, it doesn’t tell us anything we don’t already
know. Once again, we see that a less-available item is more desired and
valued. The real worth of the cookie study comes from two additional
findings. Let’s take them one at a time, as each deserves a thorough
consideration.
The first of these noteworthy results involved a small variation in
the experiment’s basic procedure. Rather than rating the cookies under
conditions of constant scarcity, some participants were first given a jar
of ten cookies that was then replaced by a jar of two cookies. Thus, before taking a bite, certain of the participants saw their abundant supply
of cookies reduced to a scarce supply. Other participants, however,
knew only scarcity of supply from the outset, since the number of
cookies in their jars was left at two. With this procedure, the researchers
were seeking to answer a question about types of scarcity: Do we value
more those things that have recently become less available to us, or
those things that have always been scarce? In the cookie experiment,
the answer was plain. The drop from abundance to scarcity produced
a decidedly more positive reaction to the cookies than did constant
scarcity.
The idea that newly experienced scarcity is the more powerful kind
applies to situations well beyond the bounds of the cookie study. For
example, social scientists have determined that such scarcity is a primary

194 / Influence
cause of political turmoil and violence. Perhaps the most prominent
proponent of this argument is James C. Davies, who states that we are
most likely to find revolutions where a period of improving economic
and social conditions is followed by a short, sharp reversal in those
conditions. Thus it is not the traditionally most downtrodden
people—who have come to see their deprivation as part of the natural
order of things—who are especially liable to revolt. Instead, revolutionaries are more likely to be those who have been given at least some taste
of a better life. When the economic and social improvements they have
experienced and come to expect suddenly become less available, they
desire them more than ever and often rise up violently to secure them.15
Davies has gathered persuasive evidence for his novel thesis from a
range of revolutions, revolts, and internal wars, including the French,
Russian, and Egyptian revolutions as well as such domestic uprisings
as Dorr’s Rebellion in nineteenth-century Rhode Island, the American
Civil War, and the urban black riots of the 1960s. In each case, a time
of increasing well-being preceded a tight cluster of reversals that burst
into violence.
The racial conflict in America’s cities during the mid-1960s represents a case in point that many of us can recall. At the time, it was not
uncommon to hear the question, “Why now?” It didn’t seem to make
sense that within their three-hundred-year history, most of which had
been spent in servitude and much of the rest in privation, American
blacks would choose the socially progressive sixties in which to revolt.
Indeed, as Davies points out, the two decades after the start of World
War II had brought dramatic political and economic gains to the black
population. In 1940, blacks faced stringent legal restrictions in such
areas as housing, transportation, and education; moreover, even with
the same amount of education, the average black family earned only a
bit more than half of its counterpart white family. Fifteen years later,
much had changed. Federal legislation had struck down as unacceptable
formal and informal attempts to segregate blacks in schools, public
places, housing, and employment settings. Large economic advances
had been made, too; black family income had risen from 56 percent to
80 percent of that of a comparably educated white family.
But then, according to Davies’s analysis of social conditions, this
rapid progress was stymied by events that soured the heady optimism
of previous years. First, political and legal change proved substantially
easier to enact than social change. Despite all the progressive legislation
of the forties and fifties, blacks perceived that most neighborhoods,
jobs, and schools remained segregated. Thus the Washington-based
victories came to feel like defeats at home. For example, in the four
years following the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1954 decision to integrate all

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 195
public schools, blacks were the targets of 530 acts of violence (direct
intimidation of black children and parents, bombings, and burnings)
designed to prevent school integration. This violence generated the
perception of another sort of setback in black progress. For the first time
since well before World War II, when lynchings had occurred at an
average rate of seventy-eight per year, blacks had to be concerned about
the basic safety of their families. The new violence was not limited to
the education issue, either. Peaceful civil-rights demonstrations of the
time were frequently confronted by hostile crowds—and police.
Still another type of downturn occurred—in pocketbook prog-ress.
In 1962, the income of a black family had slid back to 74 percent of that
of a similarly educated white family. By Davies’s argument, the most
illuminating aspect of this 74 percent figure is not that it represented a
long-term increase in prosperity from pre-1940s levels but that it represented a short-term decline from the flush mid-1950s levels. In the next
year came the Birmingham riots and, in staccato succession, scores of
violent demonstrations, building toward the major upheavals of Watts,
Newark, and Detroit.
In keeping with a distinct historical pattern of revolution, blacks in
the United States were more rebellious when their prolonged progress
was curtailed somewhat than they were before it began. This pattern
offers a valuable lesson for would-be rulers: When it comes to freedoms,
it is more dangerous to have given for a while than never to have given
at all. The problem for a government that seeks to improve the political
and economic status of a traditionally oppressed group is that, in so
doing, it establishes freedoms for the group where none existed before.
And should these now established freedoms become less available, there
will be an especially hot variety of hell to pay.
We can look to much more recent events in the former Soviet Union
for evidence that this basic rule still holds. After decades of repression,
Mikhail Gorbachev began granting the Soviet populace new liberties,
privileges, and choices via the twin policies of glasnost and perestroika.
Alarmed by the direction their nation was taking, a small group of
government, military, and KGB officials staged a coup, placing
Gorbachev under house arrest and announcing on August 19, 1991,
that they had assumed power and were moving to reinstate the old
order. Most of the world imagined that the Soviet people, known for
their characteristic acquiescence to subjugation, would passively yield
as they had always done. Time magazine editor Lance Morrow described
his own reaction similarly: “At first the coup seemed to confirm the
norm. The news administered a dark shock, followed immediately by
a depressed sense of resignation: of course, of course, the Russians must

196 / Influence
revert to their essential selves, to their own history. Gorbachev and
glasnost were an aberration; now we are back to fatal normality.”
But these were not to be normal times. For one thing, Gorbachev had
not governed in the tradition of the czars or Stalin or any of the line of
oppressive postwar rulers who had not allowed even a breath of freedom to the masses. He had ceded them certain rights and choices. And
when these now-established freedoms were threatened, the people
lashed out the way a dog would if someone tried taking a fresh bone
from its mouth. Within hours of the junta’s announcement, thousands
were in the streets, erecting barricades, confronting armed troops, surrounding tanks, and defying curfews. The uprising was so swift, so
massive, so unitary in its opposition to any retreat from the gains of
glasnost that after only three riotous days, the astonished officials relented, surrendering their power and pleading for mercy from President
Gorbachev. Had they been students of history—or of psychology—the
failed plotters would not have been so surprised by the tidal wave of
popular resistance that swallowed their coup. From the vantage point
of either discipline, they could have learned an invariant lesson:
Freedoms once granted will not be relinquished without a fight.
The lesson applies as well to the politics of family as country. The
parent who grants privileges or enforces rules erratically invites rebelliousness by unwittingly establishing freedoms for the child. The parent
who only sometimes prohibits between-meal sweets may create for the
child the freedom to have such snacks. At that point, enforcing the rule
becomes a much more difficult and explosive matter because the child
is no longer merely lacking a never-possessed right but is losing an established one. As we have seen in the case of political freedoms and
(especially pertinent to the present discussion) chocolate-chip cookies,
people see a thing as more desirable when it has recently become less
available than when it has been scarce all along. We should not be surprised, then, when research shows that parents who enforce discipline
inconsistently produce generally rebellious children.16
Let’s look back to the cookie study for another insight into the way
we react to scarcity. We’ve already seen from the results of that study
that scarce cookies were rated higher than abundant cookies and that
newly scarce cookies were rated higher still. Staying with the newly
scarce cookies now, there was a certain cookie that was the highest rated
of all: those that became less available because of a demand for them.
Remember that in the experiment the participants who experienced
new scarcity had been given a jar of ten cookies that was then replaced
with a jar of only two cookies. Actually, the researchers did this in one
of two ways. To certain participants, it was explained that some of their

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 197
cookies had to be given away to other raters to supply the demand for
cookies in the study. To another set of participants, it was explained
that their number of cookies had to be reduced because the researcher
had simply made a mistake and given them the wrong jar initially. The
results showed that those whose cookies became scarce through the
process of social demand liked them significantly more than those
whose cookies became scarce by mistake. In fact, the cookies made less
available through social demand were rated the most desirable of any
in the study.
This finding highlights the importance of competition in the pursuit
of limited resources. Not only do we want the same item more when
it is scarce, we want it most when we are in competition for it. Advertisers often try to exploit this tendency in us. In their ads, we learn that
“popular demand” for an item is so great that we must “hurry to buy,”
or we see a crowd pressing against the doors of a store before the start
of a sale, or we watch a flock of hands quickly deplete a supermarket
shelf of a product. There is more to such images than the idea of ordinary social proof. The message is not just that the product is good because
other people think so, but also that we are in direct competition with
those people for it.
The feeling of being in competition for scarce resources has powerfully
motivating properties. The ardor of an indifferent lover surges with the
appearance of a rival. It is often for reasons of strategy, therefore, that
romantic partners reveal (or invent) the attentions of a new admirer.
Salespeople are taught to play the same game with indecisive customers.
For example, a realtor who is trying to sell a house to a “fence-sitting”
prospect will sometimes call the prospect with news of another potential
buyer who has seen the house, liked it, and is scheduled to return the
following day to talk about terms. When wholly fabricated, the new
bidder is commonly described as an outsider with plenty of money:
“an out-of-state investor buying for tax purposes” and “a physician
and his wife moving into town” are favorites. The tactic, called in some
circles “goosing ’em off the fence,” can work devastatingly well. The
thought of losing out to a rival frequently turns a buyer from hesitant
to zealous.
There is something almost physical about the desire to have a contested item. Shoppers at big close-out or bargain sales report being
caught up emotionally in the event. Charged by the crush of competitors,
they swarm and struggle to claim merchandise they would otherwise
disdain. Such behavior brings to mind the “feeding frenzy” of wild,
indiscriminate eating among animal groups. Commercial fishermen
exploit this phenomenon by throwing a quantity of loose bait to large
schools of certain fish. Soon the water is a roiling expanse of thrashing

198 / Influence
fins and snapping mouths competing for the food. At this point, the
fishermen save time and money by dropping unbaited lines into the
water, since the crazed fish will bite ferociously at anything now, including bare metal hooks.
There is a noticeable parallel between the ways that commercial
fishermen and department stores generate a competitive fury in those
they wish to hook. To attract and arouse the catch, fishermen scatter
some loose bait called chum. For similar reasons, department stores
holding a bargain sale toss out a few especially good deals on prominently advertised items called loss leaders. If the bait, of either form, has
done its job, a large and eager crowd forms to snap it up. Soon, in the
rush to score, the group becomes agitated, nearly blinded, by the adversarial nature of the situation. Humans and fish alike lose perspective
on what they want and begin striking at whatever is being contested.
One wonders whether the tuna flapping on a dry deck with only a bare
hook in its mouth shares the what-hit-me bewilderment of the shopper
arriving home with only a load of department-store bilge.
Lest we believe that the competition-for-limited-resources-fever occurs
only in such unsophisticated forms of life as tuna and bargain-basement
shoppers, we should examine the story behind a remarkable purchase
decision made in 1973 by Barry Diller, who was then vice president for
prime-time programming at the American Broadcasting Company, but
who has since been labeled the “miracle mogul” by Time magazine in
reference to his remarkable successes as head of Paramount Pictures
and the Fox Television Network. He agreed to pay $3.3 million for a
single television showing of the movie The Poseidon Adventure. The figure
is noteworthy in that it greatly exceeded the highest price ever previously paid for a one-time movie showing: $2 million for Patton. In fact,
the payment was so excessive that ABC figured to lose $1 million on
the Poseidon showing. As NBC vice president for special programs Bill
Storke declared at the time, “There’s no way they can get their money
back, no way at all.”
How could an astute and experienced businessman like Diller go for
a deal that would produce an expected loss of a million dollars? The
answer may lie in a second noteworthy aspect of the sale: It was the
first time that a motion picture had been offered to the networks in an
open-bid auction. Never before had the three major commercial networks been forced to battle for a scarce resource in quite this way. The
novel idea of a competitive auction was the brainchild of the movie’s
flamboyant showman-producer, Irwin Allen, and a 20th Century Fox
vice president, William Self, who must have been ecstatic about the
outcome. But how can we be sure that it was the auction format that

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 199
generated the spectacular sales price rather than the blockbuster quality
of the movie itself?
Some comments from the auction participants provide impressive
evidence. First came a statement from the victor, Barry Diller, intended
to set future policy for his network. In language sounding as if it could
have escaped only from between clenched teeth, he said, “ABC has
decided regarding its policy for the future that it would never again
enter into an auction situation.” Even more instructive are the remarks
of Diller’s rival, Robert Wood, then president of CBS Television, who
nearly lost his head and outbid his competitors at ABC and NBC:
We were very rational at the start. We priced the movie out, in
terms of what it could bring in for us, then allowed a certain value
on top of that for exploitation.
But then the bidding started. ABC opened with two million. I
came back with two point four. ABC went to two point eight. And
the fever of the thing caught us. Like a guy who had lost his mind,
I kept bidding. Finally, I went to three point two; and there came
a moment when I said to myself, “Good grief, if I get it, what the
heck am I going to do with it?” When ABC finally topped me, my
main feeling was relief.
It’s been very educational.17
According to interviewer Bob MacKenzie, when Wood made his “It’s
been very educational” statement, he was smiling. We can be sure that
when ABC’s Diller made his “never again” announcement, he was not.
Both men had clearly learned something from the “Great Poseidon
Auction.” But for one, there had been a $1 million tuition charge. Fortunately, there is a valuable but drastically less expensive lesson here for
us, too. It is instructive to note that the smiling man was the one who
had lost the highly sought-after prize. As a general rule, whenever the
dust settles and we find losers looking and speaking like winners (and
vice versa), we should be especially wary of the conditions that kicked
up the dust—in the present case, open competition for a scarce resource.
As the TV executives now know, extreme caution is advised whenever
we encounter the devilish construction of scarcity plus rivalry.

HOW TO SAY NO
It is easy enough to feel properly warned against scarcity pressures;
but it is substantially more difficult to act on that warning. Part of the
problem is that our typical reaction to scarcity hinders our ability to
think. When we watch something we want become less available, a
physical agitation sets in. Especially in those cases involving direct

200 / Influence
competition, the blood comes up, the focus narrows, and emotions rise.
As this visceral current advances, the cognitive, rational side retreats.
In the rush of arousal, it is difficult to be calm and studied in our approach. As CBS Television’s president, Robert Wood, commented in
the wake of his Poseidon adventure, “You get caught up in the mania
of the thing, the acceleration of it. Logic goes right out the window.”
Here’s our predicament, then: Knowing the causes and workings of
scarcity pressures may not be sufficient to protect us from them because
knowing is a cognitive thing, and cognitive processes are suppressed
by our emotional reaction to scarcity. In fact, this may be the reason for
the great effectiveness of scarcity tactics. When they are employed
properly, our first line of defense against foolish behavior—a thoughtful
analysis of the situation—becomes less likely.
If, because of brain-clouding arousal, we can’t rely on our knowledge
about the scarcity principle to stimulate properly cautious behavior,
what can we use? Perhaps, in fine jujitsu style, we can use the arousal
itself as our prime cue. In this way we can turn the enemy’s strength
to our advantage. Rather than relying on a considered, cognitive analysis of the entire situation, we might simply tune ourselves to the internal, visceral sweep for our warning. By learning to flag the experience
of heightening arousal in a compliance situation, we can alert ourselves
to the possibility of scarcity tactics there and to the need for caution.
But suppose we accomplish this trick of using the rising tide of
arousal as a signal to calm ourselves and to proceed with care. What
then? Is there any other piece of information we can use to help make
a proper decision in the face of scarcity? After all, merely recognizing
that we ought to move carefully doesn’t tell us the direction in which
to move; it only provides the necessary context for a thoughtful decision.
Fortunately, there is information available on which we can base
thoughtful decisions about scarce items. It comes, once again, from the
chocolate-chip-cookie study, where the researchers uncovered something
that seems strange but rings true regarding scarcity: Even though the
scarce cookies were rated as significantly more desirable, they were not
rated as any better-tasting than the abundant cookies. So despite the
increased yearning that scarcity caused (the raters said they wanted to
have more of the scarce cookies in the future and would pay a greater
price for them), it did not make the cookies taste one whit better. Therein
lies an important insight. The joy is not in experiencing a scarce commodity but in possessing it. It is important that we not confuse the two.
Whenever we confront the scarcity pressures surrounding some item,
we must also confront the question of what it is we want from the item.
If the answer is that we want the thing for the social, economic, or
psychological benefits of possessing something rare, then, fine; scarcity

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 201
pressures will give us a good indication of how much we would want
to pay for it—the less available it is, the more valuable to us it will be.
But very often we don’t want a thing purely for the sake of owning it.
We want it, instead, for its utility value; we want to eat it or drink it or
touch it or hear it or drive it or otherwise use it. In such cases it is vital
to remember that scarce things do not taste or feel or sound or ride or
work any better because of their limited availability.
Although this is a simple point, it can often escape us when we experience the heightened desirability that scarce items naturally possess. I
can cite a family example. My brother Richard supported himself
through school by employing a compliance trick that cashed in handsomely on the tendency of most people to miss that simple point. In
fact, his tactic was so effective that he had to work only a few hours
each weekend for his money, leaving the rest of the time free for his
studies.
Richard sold cars, but not in a showroom nor on a car lot. He would
buy a couple of used cars sold privately through the newspaper on one
weekend and, adding nothing but soap and water, would sell them at
a decided profit through the newspaper on the following weekend. To
do this, he had to know three things. First, he had to know enough
about cars to buy those that were offered for sale at the bottom of their
blue-book price range but could be legitimately resold for a higher price.
Second, once he got the car, he had to know how to write a newspaper
ad that would stimulate substantial buyer interest. Third, once a buyer
arrived, he had to know how to use the scarcity principle to generate
more desire for the car than it perhaps deserved. Richard knew how to
do all three. For our purposes, though, we need to examine his craft
with just the third.
For a car he had purchased on the prior weekend, he would place an
ad in the Sunday paper. Because he knew how to construct a good ad,
he usually received an array of calls from potential buyers on Sunday
morning. Each prospect who was interested enough to want to see the
car was given an appointment time—the same appointment time. So if six
people were scheduled, they were all scheduled for, say, two o’clock
that afternoon. This little device of simultaneous scheduling paved the
way for later compliance because it created an atmosphere of competition for a limited resource.
Typically, the first prospect to arrive would begin a studied examination of the car and would engage in standard car-buying behavior,
such as pointing out any blemishes or deficiencies or asking if the price
was negotiable. The psychology of the situation changed radically,
however, when the second buyer drove up. The availability of the car
to either prospect suddenly became limited by the presence of the other.

202 / Influence
Often the earlier arrival, inadvertently stoking the sense of rivalry,
would assert his right to primary consideration. “Just a minute, now.
I was here first.” If he didn’t assert that right, Richard would do it for
him. Addressing the second buyer, Richard would say, “Excuse me,
but this other gentleman was here before you. So can I ask you to wait
on the other side of the driveway for a few minutes until he’s finished
looking at the car? Then, if he decides he doesn’t want it or if he can’t
make up his mind, I’ll show it to you.”
Richard claims it was possible to watch the agitation grow on the
first buyer’s face. His leisurely assessment of the car’s pros and cons
had suddenly become a now-or-never, limited-time-only rush to decision
over a contested resource. If he didn’t decide for the car—at Richard’s
asking price—in the next few minutes, he might lose it for good to
that…that…lurking newcomer over there. For his part, the second
buyer would be equally agitated by the combination of rivalry and restricted availability. He would pace on the periphery, visibly straining
to get at this now more desirable hunk of metal. Should two-o’clock
appointment number one fail to buy or even fail to decide quickly
enough, two-o’clock appointment number two was ready to pounce.
If these conditions alone were not enough to secure a favorable purchase decision immediately, the trap snapped surely shut as soon as
the third two-o’clock appointment arrived on the scene. According to
Richard, stacked-up competition was usually too much for the first
prospect to bear. He would end the pressure quickly by either agreeing
to Richard’s price or by leaving abruptly. In the latter instance, the
second arrival would strike at the chance to buy out of a sense of relief
coupled with a new feeling of rivalry with that…that…lurking newcomer over there.
All those buyers who contributed to my brother’s college education
failed to recognize a fundamental fact about their purchases: The increased desire that spurred them to buy had little to do with the merits
of the car. That failure of recognition occurred for two reasons. First,
the situation Richard arranged for them produced an emotional reaction
that made it difficult for them to think straight. Second, as a consequence, they never stopped to think that the reason they wanted the
car in the first place was to use it, not merely to have it. And the competition-for-a-scarce-resource pressures Richard applied affected only
their desire to have the car in the sense of possessing it. Those pressures
did not affect the value of the car in terms of the real purpose for which
they had wanted it.
Should we find ourselves beset by scarcity pressures in a compliance
situation, then, our best response would occur in a two-stage sequence.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 203
As soon as we feel the tide of emotional arousal that flows from scarcity
influences, we should use that rise in arousal as a signal to stop short.
Panicky, feverish reactions have no place in wise compliance decisions.
We need to calm ourselves and regain a rational perspective. Once that
is done, we can move to the second stage by asking ourselves why we
want the item under consideration. If the answer is that we want it
primarily for the purpose of owning it, then we should use its availability to help gauge how much we want to spend for it. However, if the
answer is that we want it primarily for its function (that is, we want
something good to drive, drink, eat, etc.), then we must remember that
the item under consideration will function equally well whether scarce
or plentiful. Quite simply, we need to recall that the scarce cookies
didn’t taste any better.
READER’S REPORT

From a Blacksburg, Virginia, Woman
“Last Christmas I met a twenty-seven-year-old man. I was nineteen.
Although he really wasn’t my type, I went out with him—probably
because it was a status thing to date an older man—but I really didn’t
become interested in him until my folks expressed their concern about
his age. The more they got on my case about it, the more in love I became. It only lasted five months, but this was about four months longer
than it would have lasted if my parents hadn’t said anything.”
Although Romeo and Juliet have long since passed away, it appears
that the “Romeo and Juliet effect” is alive and well and making regular
appearances in places like Blacksburg, Virginia.

Epilogue
INSTANT INFLUENCE
Primitive Consent for an Automatic Age
Every day in every way, I’m getting better.
—EMILE COUE
Every day in every way, I’m getting busier.
—ROBERT CIALDINI

remarkB able TV talk1960
show that was syndicated from California. The program
ACK IN THE

S A MAN NAMED JOE PINE HOSTED A RATHER

was made distinctive by Pine’s caustic and confrontational style with
his guests—for the most part, a collection of exposure-hungry entertainers, would-be celebrities, and representatives of fringe political or social
organizations. The host’s abrasive approach was designed to provoke
his guests into arguments, to fluster them into embarrassing admissions,
and generally to make them look foolish. It was not uncommon for Pine
to introduce a visitor and launch immediately into an attack on the individual’s beliefs, talent, or appearance. Some people claimed that Pine’s
acid personal style was partially caused by a leg amputation that had
embittered him to life; others said no, that he was just vituperous by
nature.
One evening rock musician Frank Zappa was a guest on the show.
This was at a time in the sixties when very long hair on men was still

206 / Influence
unusual and controversial. As soon as Zappa had been introduced and
seated, the following exchange occurred:
PINE: I guess your long hair makes you a girl.
ZAPPA: I guess your wooden leg makes you a table.

Aside from containing what may be my favorite ad-lib, the above
dialogue illustrates a fundamental theme of this book: Very often in
making a decision about someone or something, we don’t use all the
relevant available information; we use, instead, only a single, highly
representative piece of the total. And an isolated piece of information,
even though it normally counsels us correctly, can lead us to clearly
stupid mistakes—mistakes that, when exploited by clever others, leave
us looking silly or worse.
At the same time, a complicating companion theme has been present
throughout this book: Despite the susceptibility to stupid decisions that
accompanies a reliance on a single feature of the available data, the pace
of modern life demands that we frequently use this shortcut. Recall that
early in Chapter 1, our shortcut approach was likened to the automatic
responding of lower animals, whose elaborate behavior patterns could
be triggered by the presence of a lone stimulus feature—a “cheep-cheep”
sound, a shade of red breast feather, or a specific sequence of light
flashes. The reason infrahumans must often rely on such solitary stimulus features is their restricted mental capability. Their small brains
cannot begin to register and process all the relevant information in their
environments. So these species have evolved special sensitivities to
certain aspects of the information. Because those selected aspects of
information are normally enough to cue a correct response, the system
is usually very efficient: Whenever a female turkey hears “cheep-cheep,”
click, whirr, out rolls the proper maternal behavior in a mechanical
fashion that conserves much of her limited brainpower for dealing with
the variety of other situations and choices she must face in her day.
We, of course, have vastly more effective brain mechanisms than
mother turkeys, or any other animal group, for that matter. We are
unchallenged in the ability to take into account a multitude of relevant
facts and, consequently, to make good decisions. Indeed, it is this information-processing advantage over other species that has helped
make us the dominant form of life on the planet.
Still, we have our capacity limitations, too; and, for the sake of efficiency, we must sometimes retreat from the time-consuming, sophisticated, fully informed brand of decision making to a more automatic,
primitive, single-feature type of responding. For instance, in deciding

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 207
whether to say yes or no to a requester, it is clear that we frequently
pay attention to but one piece of the relevant information in the situation. We have been exploring several of the most popular of the single
pieces of information that we use to prompt our compliance decisions.
They are the most popular prompts precisely because they are the most
reliable ones, those that normally point us toward the correct choice.
That is why we employ the factors of reciprocation, consistency, social
proof, liking, authority, and scarcity so often and so automatically in
making our compliance decisions. Each, by itself, provides a highly reliable cue as to when we will be better off saying yes than no.
We are likely to use these lone cues when we don’t have the inclination, time, energy, or cognitive resources to undertake a complete analysis of the situation. Where we are rushed, stressed, uncertain, indifferent, distracted, or fatigued, we tend to focus on less of the information
available to us. When making decisions under these circumstances, we
often revert to the rather primitive but necessary single-piece-of-goodevidence approach.1 All this leads to a jarring insight: With the sophisticated mental apparatus we have used to build world eminence as a
species, we have created an environment so complex, fast-paced, and
information-laden that we must increasingly deal with it in the fashion
of the animals we long ago transcended.
John Stuart Mill, the British economist, political thinker, and philosopher of science, died more than a hundred years ago. The year of his
death (1873) is important because he is reputed to have been the last
man to know everything there was to know in the world. Today, the
notion that one of us could be aware of all known facts is only laughable.
After eons of slow accumulation, human knowledge has snowballed
into an era of momentum-fed, multiplicative, monstrous expansion.
We now live in a world where most of the information is less than fifteen
years old. In certain fields of science alone (for example, physics),
knowledge is said to double every eight years. And the scientific information explosion is not limited to such arcane arenas as molecular
chemistry or quantum physics but extends to everyday areas of knowledge where we strive to keep ourselves current—health, child development, nutrition, and the like. What’s more, this rapid growth is likely
to continue, since 90 percent of all scientists who have ever lived are
working today.
Apart from the streaking advance of science, things are quickly
changing much closer to home. In his book Future Shock, Alvin Toffler
provided early documentation of the unprecedented and increasing
rapidity of modern daily life: We travel more and faster; we relocate
more frequently to new residences, which are built and torn down more

208 / Influence
quickly; we contact more people and have shorter relationships with
them; in the supermarket, car showroom, and shopping mall, we are
faced with an array of choices among styles and products that were
unheard of the previous year and may well be obsolete or forgotten by
the next. Novelty, transience, diversity, and acceleration are acknowledged as prime descriptors of civilized existence.
This avalanche of information and choices is made possible by burgeoning technological progress. Leading the way are developments in
our ability to collect, store, retrieve, and communicate information. At
first, the fruits of such advances were limited to large organizations—government agencies or powerful corporations. For example,
speaking as chairman of Citicorp, Walter Wriston could say of his
company, “We have tied together a data base in the world that is capable
of telling almost anyone in the world, almost anything, immediately.”2
But now, with further developments in telecommunication and computer technology, access to such staggering amounts of information is
falling within the reach of individual citizens. Extensive cable and
satellite television systems provide one route for that information into
the average home.
The other major route is the personal computer. In 1972, Norman
Macrae, an editor of The Economist, speculated prophetically about a
time in the future:
The prospect is, after all, that we are going to enter an age when
any duffer sitting at a computer terminal in his laboratory or office
or public library or home can delve through unimaginable increased mountains of information in mass-assembly data banks
with mechanical powers of concentration and calculation that will
be greater by a factor of tens of thousands than was ever available
to the human brain of even an Einstein.
One short decade later, Time magazine signaled that Macrae’s future
age had arrived by naming a machine, the personal computer, as its
Man of the Year. Time’s editors defended their choice by citing the
consumer “stampede” to purchase small computers and by arguing
that “America [and], in a larger perspective, the entire world will never
be the same.” Macrae’s vision is now being realized. Millions of ordinary
“duffers” are sitting at machines with the potential to present and
analyze enough data to bury an Einstein.
Because technology can evolve much faster than we can, our natural
capacity to process information is likely to be increasingly inadequate
to handle the surfeit of change, choice, and challenge that is characteristic of modern life. More and more frequently, we will find ourselves

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 209
in the position of the lower animals—with a mental apparatus that is
unequipped to deal thoroughly with the intricacy and richness of the
outside environment. Unlike the animals, whose cognitive powers have
always been relatively deficient, we have created our own deficiency
by constructing a radically more complex world. But the consequence
of our new deficiency is the same as that of the animals’ long-standing
one. When making a decision, we will less frequently enjoy the luxury
of a fully consid-ered analysis of the total situation but will revert increasingly to a focus on a single, usually reliable feature of it.
When those single features are truly reliable, there is nothing inherently wrong with the shortcut approach of narrowed attention and
automatic response to a particular piece of information. The problem
comes when something causes the normally trustworthy cues to counsel
us poorly, to lead us to erroneous actions and wrongheaded decisions.
As we have seen, one such cause is the trickery of certain compliance
practitioners who seek to profit from the rather mindless and mechanical nature of shortcut response. If, as seems true, the frequency of
shortcut response is increasing with the pace and form of modern life,
we can be sure that the frequency of this trickery is destined to increase
as well.
What can we do about the expected intensified attack on our system
of shortcuts? More than evasive action, I would urge forceful counterassault. There is an important qualification, however. Compliance
professionals who play fairly by the rules of shortcut response are not
to be considered the enemy; on the contrary, they are our allies in an
efficient and adaptive process of exchange. The proper targets for
counteraggression are only those individuals who falsify, counterfeit,
or misrepresent the evidence that naturally cues our shortcut responses.
Let’s take an illustration from what is perhaps our most frequently
used shortcut. According to the principle of social proof, we often decide
to do what other people like us are doing. It makes all kinds of sense
since, most of the time, an action that is popular in a given situation is
also functional and appropriate. Thus, an advertiser who, without using
deceptive statistics, provides information that a brand of toothpaste is
the largest selling or fastest growing has offered us valuable evidence
about the quality of the product and the probability that we will like
it. Provided that we are in the market for a tube of good toothpaste, we
might want to rely on that single piece of information, popularity, to
decide to try it. This strategy will likely steer us right, will unlikely steer
us far wrong, and will conserve our cognitive energies for dealing with
the rest of our increasingly information-laden, decision-overloaded
environment. The advertiser who allows us to use effectively this effi-

210 / Influence
cient strategy is hardly our antagonist but rather must be considered a
cooperating partner.
The story becomes quite different, however, should a compliance
practitioner try to stimulate a shortcut response by giving us a fraudulent signal for it. The enemy is the advertiser who seeks to create an
image of popularity for a brand of toothpaste by, say, constructing a
series of staged “unrehearsed-interview” commercials in which an array
of actors posing as ordinary citizens praise the product. Here, where
the evidence of popularity is counterfeit, we, the principle of social
proof, and our shortcut response to it, are all being exploited. In an
earlier chapter, I recommended against the purchase of any product
featured in a faked “unrehearsed-interview” ad, and I urged that we
send the product manufacturers letters detailing the reason and suggesting that they dismiss their advertising agency. I would recommend
extending this aggressive stance to any situation in which a compliance
professional abuses the principle of social proof (or any other weapon
of influence) in this manner. We should refuse to watch TV programs
that use canned laughter. If we see a bartender beginning a shift by
salting his tip jar with a bill or two of his own, he should get none from
us. If, after waiting in line outside a nightclub, we discover from the
amount of available space that the wait was designed to impress passersby with false evidence of the club’s popularity, we should leave immediately and announce our reason to those still in line. In short, we
should be willing to use boycott, threat, confrontation, censure, tirade,
nearly anything, to retaliate.
I don’t consider myself pugnacious by nature, but I actively advocate
such belligerent actions because in a way I am at war with the exploiters—we all are. It is important to recognize, however, that their
motive for profit is not the cause for hostilities; that motive, after all, is
something we each share to an extent. The real treachery, and the thing
we cannot tolerate, is any attempt to make their profit in a way that
threatens the reliability of our shortcuts. The blitz of modern daily life
demands that we have faithful shortcuts, sound rules of thumb to handle
it all. These are not luxuries any longer; they are out-and-out necessities
that figure to become increasingly vital as the pulse of daily life quickens. That is why we should want to retaliate whenever we see someone
betraying one of our rules of thumb for profit. We want that rule to be
as effective as possible. But to the degree that its fitness for duty is
regularly undercut by the tricks of a profiteer, we naturally will use it
less and will be less able to cope efficiently with the decisional burdens
of our day. We cannot allow that without a fight. The stakes have gotten
too high.

NOTES

CHAPTER 1 (PAGES 1–16)

1. Honest, this animal researcher’s name is Fox. See his 1974 monograph for a complete description of the turkey and polecat experiment.
2. Sources for the robin and bluethroat information are Lack (1943)
and Peiponen (1960), respectively.
3. Although several important similarities exist between this kind of
automatic responding in humans and lower animals, there are some
important differences as well. The automatic behavior sequences of
humans tend to be learned rather than inborn, more flexible than the
lock-step patterns of the lower animals, and responsive to a larger
number of triggers.
4. Perhaps the common “because…just because” response of children
asked to explain their behavior can be traced to their shrewd recognition
of the unusual amount of power adults appear to assign to the raw
word because.
The reader who wishes to find a more systematic treatment of Langer’s
Xerox study and her conceptualization of it can do so in Langer (1989).
5. Sources for the Photuris and the blenny information are Lloyd (1965)
and Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1958), respectively. As exploitative as these creatures
seem, they are topped in this respect by an insect known as the rove
beetle. By using a variety of triggers involving smell and touch, the rove
beetles get two species of ants to protect, groom, and feed them as larvae
and to harbor them for the winter as adults. Responding mechanically
to the beetles’ trick trigger features, the ants treat the beetles as though
they were fellow ants. Inside the ant nests, the beetles respond to their
hosts’ hospitality by eating ant eggs and young, yet they are never
harmed (Hlldobler, 1971).
6. These studies are reported by Kenrick and Gutierres (1980), who
warn that the unrealistically attractive people portrayed in the popular
media (for example, actors, actresses, models) may cause us to be less

212 / Influence
satisfied with the looks of the genuinely available romantic possibilities
around us. More recent work by these authors takes their argument a
step farther, showing that exposure to the exaggerated sexual attractiveness of nude pinup bodies (in such magazines as Playboy and Playgirl)
causes people to become less pleased with the sexual desirability of
their current spouse or live-in mate (Kenrick, Gutierres, and Goldberg,
1989).
CHAPTER 2 (PAGES 17–56)

1. A formal description of the greeting-card study is provided in Kunz
and Woolcott (1976).
2. Certain societies have formalized the rule into ritual. Consider for
example the “Vartan Bhanji,” an institutionalized custom of the gift
exchange common to parts of Pakistan and India. In commenting upon
the “Vartan Bhanji,” Gouldner (1960) remarks:
It is…notable that the system painstakingly prevents the total
elimination of outstanding obligations. Thus, on the occasion of
a marriage, departing guests are given gifts of sweets. In weighing
them out, the hostess may say, “These five are yours,” meaning
“These are a repayment for what you formerly gave me,” and then
she adds an extra measure, saying, “These are mine.” On the next
occasion, she will receive these back along with an additional
measure which she later returns, and so on.
3. The quote is from Leakey and Lewin (1978).
4. For a fuller discussion, see Tiger and Fox (1971).
5. The experiment is reported formally in Regan (1971).
6. The statement appears in Mauss (1954).
7. Surprise is an effective compliance producer in its own right. People
who are surprised by a request will often comply because they are
momentarily unsure of themselves and, consequently, influenced easily.
For example, the social psychologists Stanley Milgram and John Sabini
(1975) have shown that people riding on the New York subway were
twice as likely to give up their seats to a person who surprised them
with the request “Excuse me. May I have your seat?” than to one who
forewarned them first by mentioning to a fellow passenger that he was
thinking of asking for someone’s seat (56 percent vs. 28 percent).
8. It is interesting that a cross-cultural study has shown that those
who break the reciprocity rule in the reverse direction—by giving
without allowing the recipient an opportunity to repay—are also disliked for it. This result was found to hold for each of the three national-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 213
ities investigated—Americans, Swedes, and Japanese. See Gergen et al.
(1975) for an account of the study.
9. The Pittsburgh study was done by Greenberg and Shapiro. The
data on women’s sexual obligations were collected by George, Gournic,
and McAfee (1988).
10. To convince ourselves that this result was no fluke, we conducted
two more experiments testing the effectiveness of the rejection-thenretreat trick. Both showed results similar to the first experiment. See
Cialdini et al. (1975) for the details of all three.
11. The Israeli study was conducted in 1979 by Schwartzwald, Raz,
and Zvibel.
12. The TV Guide article appeared in December 1978.
13. The source for the quotes is Magruder (1974).
14. Consumer Reports, January 1975, p. 62.
15. Another way of gauging the effectiveness of a request technique
is to examine the bottom-line proportion of individuals who, after being
asked, complied with the request. Using such a measure, the rejectionthen-retreat procedure was more than four times more effective than
the procedure of asking for the smaller request only. See Miller et al.
(1976) for a complete description of the study.
16. The blood-donation study was reported by Cialdini and Ascani
(1976).
17. The UCLA study was performed by Benton, Kelley, and Liebling
in 1972.
18. A variety of other business operations use the no-cost information
offer extensively. Pest-exterminator companies, for instance, have found
that most people who agree to a free home examination give the extermination job to the examining company, provided they are convinced
that it is needed. They apparently feel an obligation to give their business
to the firm that rendered the initial, complimentary service. Knowing
that such customers are unlikely to comparisonshop for this reason,
unscrupulous pest-control operators will take advantage of the situation
by citing higher-than-competitive prices for work commissioned in this
way.
CHAPTER 3 (PAGES 57–113)

1. The racetrack study was done twice, with the same results, by Knox
and Inkster (1968). See Rosenfeld, Kennedy, and Giacalone (1986) for
evidence that the tendency to believe more strongly in choices, once
made, applies to guesses in a lottery game, too.
2. It is important to note that the collaboration was not always intentional. The American investigators defined collaboration as “any kind

214 / Influence
of behavior which helped the enemy,” and it thus included such diverse
activities as signing peace petitions, running errands, making radio
appeals, accepting special favors, making false confessions, informing
on fellow prisoners, or divulging military information.
3. The Schein quote comes from his 1956 article “The Chinese Indoctrination Program for Prisoners of War: A Study of Attempted Brainwashing.”
4. See Greene (1965) for the source of this advice.
5. Freedman and Fraser published their data in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, in 1966.
6. The quote comes from Freedman and Fraser (1966).
7. See Segal (1954) for the article from which this quote originates.
8. See Jones and Harris (1967).
9. It is noteworthy that the housewives in this study (Kraut, 1973)
heard that they were considered charitable at least a full week before
they were asked to donate to the Multiple Sclerosis Association.
10. From “How to Begin Retailing,” Amway Corporation.
11. See Deutsch and Gerard (1955) and Kerr and MacCoun (1985) for
the details of these studies.
12. From Whiting, Kluckhohn, and Anthony (1958).
13. From Gordon and Gordon (1963).
14. The survey was conducted by Walker (1967).
15. The electric-shock experiment was published seven years after
the Aronson and Mills (1959) study by Gerard and Mathewson (1966).
16. Young (1965) conducted this research.
17. The robot study is reported fully in Freedman (1965).
18. The reader who wishes stronger evidence for the action of the
lowball tactic than my subjective observations in the car showroom
may refer to articles that attest to its effectiveness under controlled,
experimental conditions: Cialdini et al. (1978), Burger and Petty (1981),
Brownstein and Katzev (1985), and Joule (1987).
19. A formal report of the energy-conservation project appears in
Pallak et al. (1980).
20. It is not altogether unusual for even some of our most familiar
quotations to be truncated by time in ways that greatly modify their
character. For example, it is not money that the Bible claims as the root
of all evil, it is the love of money. So as not to be guilty of the same sort
of error myself, I should note that the Emerson quote from “Self-Reliance” is somewhat longer and substantially more textured than I have
reported. In full, it reads, “A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of
little minds adored by little statesmen, and philosophers, and divines.”
21. See Zajonc (1980) for a summary of this evidence.
22. This is not to say that what we feel about an issue is always differ-

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 215
ent from or always to be trusted more than what we think about it.
However, the data are clear that our emotions and beliefs often do not
point in the same direction. Therefore, in situations involving a decisional commitment likely to have generated supporting rationalizations,
feelings may well provide the truer counsel. This would be especially
so when, as in the question of Sara’s happiness, the fundamental issue
at hand concerns an emotion (Wilson, 1989).
CHAPTER 4 (PAGES 114–166)

1. The general evidence regarding the facilitative effect of canned
laughter on responses to humor comes from such studies as Smyth and
Fuller (1972), Fuller and Sheehy-Skeffinton (1974), and Nosanchuk and
Lightstone the last of which contains the indication that canned laughter
is most effective for poor material.
2. The researchers who infiltrated the Graham Crusade and who
provided the quote are Altheide and Johnson (1977).
3. See Bandura, Grusec, and Menlove (1967) and Bandura and Menlove (1968) for full descriptions of the dog-phobia treatment.
Any reader who doubts that the seeming appropriateness of an action
is importantly influenced by the number of others performing it might
try a small experiment. Stand on a busy sidewalk, pick out an empty
spot in the sky or on a tall building, and stare at it for a full minute.
Very little will happen around you during that time—most people will
walk past without glancing up, and virtually no one will stop to stare
with you. Now, on the next day, go to the same place and bring along
four friends to look upward too. Within sixty seconds, a crowd of
passersby will have stopped to crane their necks skyward with the
group. For those pedestrians who do not join you, the pressure to look
up at least briefly will be nearly irresistible; if your experiment brings
the same results as the one performed by three New York social psychologists, you and your friends will cause 80 percent of all passersby to
lift their gaze to your empty spot (Milgram, Bickman, and Berkowitz,
1967).
4. Other research besides O’Connor’s (1972) suggests that there are
two sides to the filmed-social-proof coin, however. The dramatic effect
of filmed depictions on what children find appropriate has been a source
of great distress for those concerned with frequent instances of violence
and aggression on television. Although the consequences of televised
violence on the aggressive actions of children are far from simple, the
data from a well-controlled experiment by psychologists Robert Liebert
and Robert Baron (1972) have an ominous look. Some children were
shown excerpts from a television program in which people intentionally

216 / Influence
harmed another. Afterward, these children were significantly more
harmful toward another child than were children who had watched a
nonviolent television program (a horserace). The finding that seeing
others perform aggressively led to more aggression on the part of the
young viewers held true for the two age groups tested (five-to-six-yearolds and eight-to-nine-year-olds) and for both girls and boys.
5. An engagingly written report of their complete findings is
presented in Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter’s (1956) book When
Prophecy Fails.
6. Perhaps because of the quality of ragged desperation with which
they approached their task, the believers were wholly unsuccessful at
enlarging their number. Not a single convert was gained. At that point,
in the face of the twin failures of physical and social proof, the cult
quickly disintegrated. Less than three weeks after the date of the predicted flood, group members were scattered and maintaining only
sporadic communication with one another. In one final—and ironic—disconfirmation of prediction, it was the movement that perished in the
flood.
Ruin has not always been the fate of doomsday groups whose predictions proved unsound, however. When such groups have been able to
build social proof for their beliefs through effective recruitment efforts,
they have grown and prospered. For example, when the Dutch Anabaptists saw their prophesied year of destruction, 1533, pass uneventfully, they became rabid seekers after converts, pouring unprecedented
amounts of energy into the cause. One extraordinarily eloquent missionary, Jakob van Kampen, is reported to have baptized one hundred
persons in a single day. So powerful was the snowballing social evidence
in support of the Anabaptist position that it rapidly overwhelmed the
disconfirming physical evidence and turned two thirds of the population
of Holland’s great cities into adherents.
7. From Rosenthal’s Thirty-eight Witnesses, 1964.
8. This quote comes from Latan and Darley’s award-winning book
(1968), where they introduced the concept of pluralistic ignorance.
The potentially tragic consequences of the pluralistic ignorance phenomenon are starkly illustrated in a UPI news release from Chicago:
A university coed was beaten and strangled in daylight hours near
one of the most popular tourist attractions in the city, police said
Saturday.
The nude body of Lee Alexis Wilson, 23, was found Friday in
dense shrubbery alongside the wall of the Art Institute by a 12year-old boy playing in the bushes.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 217
Police theorized she may have been sitting or standing by a
fountain in the Art Institute’s south plaza when she was attacked.
The assailant apparently then dragged her into the bushes. She
apparently was sexually assaulted, police said.
Police said thousands of persons must have passed the site and
one man told them he heard a scream about 2 P.M. but did not investigate because no one else seemed to be paying attention.
9. The New York “seizure” and “smoke” emergency studies are reported by Darley and Latan (1968) and Latan and Darley (1968), respectively. The Toronto experiment was performed by Ross (1971). The
Florida studies were published by Clark and Word in 1972 and 1974.
10. See a study by Latan and Rodin (1969) showing that groups of
strangers help less in an emergency than groups of acquaintances.
11. The wallet study was conducted by Hornstein et al. (1968), the
antismoking study by Murray et al. (1984), and the dental anxiety study
by Melamed et al. (1978).
12. The sources of these statistics are articles by Phillips in 1979 and
1980.
13. The newspaper story data are reported by Phillips (1974), while
the TV story data come from Bollen and Phillips (1982), Gould and
Schaffer (1986), Phillips and Carstensen (1986), and Schmidtke and
Hafner (1988).
14. These new data appear in Phillips (1983).
15. The quote is from The International Cyclopedia of Music and Musicians, 1964, which Sabin edited.
16. From Hornaday (1887).
CHAPTER 5 (PAGES 167–207)

1. The Canadian election study was reported by Efran and Patterson
(1976). Data of this sort give credence to the claim of some Richard
Nixon backers that the failure that contributed most to the loss of the
1960 TV debates with John F. Kennedy—and thereby to the election—was the poor performance of Nixon’s makeup man.
2. See Mack and Rainey (1990).
3. This finding—that attractive defendants, even when they are found
guilty, are less likely to be sentenced to prison—helps explain one of
the more fascinating experiments in criminology I have heard of (Kurtzburg et al., 1968). Some New York City jail inmates with facial disfigurements were given plastic surgery while incarcerated; others with
similar disfigurements were not. Furthermore, some of each of these
two groups of criminals were given services (for example, counseling

218 / Influence
and training) designed to rehabilitate them to society. One year after
their release, a check of the records revealed that (except for heroin
addicts) those given the cosmetic surgery were significantly less likely
to have returned to jail. The most interesting feature of this finding was
that it was equally true for those criminals who had not received the
traditional rehabilitative services as for those who had. Apparently,
some criminologists then argued, when it comes to ugly inmates, prisons
would be better off to abandon the costly rehabilitation treatments they
typically provide and offer plastic surgery instead; the surgery seems
to be at least as effective and decidedly less expensive.
The importance of the newer, Pennsylvania data (Stewart, 1980) is
its suggestion that the argument for surgery as a means of rehabilitation
may be faulty. Making an ugly criminal more attractive may not reduce
the chances that he will commit another crime; it may only reduce his
chances of being sent to jail for it.
4. The negligence-award study was done by Kulka and Kessler (1978),
the helping study by Benson et al. (1976), and the persuasion study by
Chaiken (1979).
5. An excellent review of this research is provided by Eagly et al.
(1991).
6. The dime-request experiment was conducted by Emswiller et al.
(1971), while the petition-signing experiment was done by Suedfeld et
al. (1971).
7. The insurance sales data were reported by Evans (1963). The
“mirroring and matching” evidence comes from work by LaFrance
(1985), Locke and Horowitz (1990), and Woodside and Davenport (1974).
Additional work suggests yet another reason for caution when dealing
with similar requesters: We typically underestimate the degree to which
similarity affects our liking for another (Gonzales et al., 1983).
8. See Drachman et al. (1978) for a complete description of the findings.
9. Bornstein (1989) summarizes much of this evidence.
10. The mirror study was performed by Mita et al. (1977).
11. For general evidence regarding the positive effect of familiarity
on attraction, see Zajonc (1968). For more specific evidence of this effect
on our response to politicians, the research of Joseph Grush is enlightening and sobering (Grush et al., 1978; Grush, 1980), in documenting a
strong connection between amount of media exposure and a candidate’s
chances of winning an election.
12. See Bornstein, Leone, and Galley (1987).
13. For an especially thorough examination of this issue, see Stephan
(1978).
14. The evidence of the tendency of ethnic groups to stay with their

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 219
own in school comes from Gerard and Miller (1975). The evidence for
the dislike of things repeatedly presented under unpleasant conditions
comes from such studies as Burgess and Sales (1971), Zajonc et al. (1974),
and Swap (1977).
15. From Aronson (1975).
16. A fascinating description of the entire boys’-camp project, called
the “Robbers’ Cave Experiment,” can be found in Sherif et al. (1961).
17. The Carlos example comes once again from Aronson’s initial report
in his 1975 article. However, additional reports by Aronson and by
others have shown similarly encouraging results. A representative list
would include Johnson and Johnson (1983), DeVries and Slavin (1978),
Cook (1990), and Aronson, Bridgeman, and Geffner (1978a, b).
18. For a careful examination of the possible pitfalls of cooperative
learning approaches, see Rosenfield and Stephan (1981).
19. In truth, little in the way of combat takes place when the salesman
enters the manager’s office under such circumstances. Often, because
the salesman knows exactly the price below which he cannot go, he
and the boss don’t even speak. In one car dealership I infiltrated while
researching this book, it was common for a salesman to have a soft
drink or cigarette in silence while the boss continued working at his
desk. After a seemly time, the salesman would loosen his tie and return
to his customers, looking weary but carrying the deal he had just
“hammered out” for them—the same deal he had in mind before entering the boss’s office.
20. For experimental evidence of the validity of Shakespeare’s observation, see Manis et al. (1974).
21. A review of research supporting this statement is provided by
Lott and Lott (1965).
22. See the study by Miller et al. (1966) for evidence.
23. The study was done by Smith and Engel (1968).
24. The rights to such associations don’t come cheaply. Corporate
sponsors spend millions to secure Olympic sponsorships, and they
spend many millions more to advertise their connections to the event.
Yet it may all be worth the expense. An Advertising Age survey found
that one third of all consumers said they would be more likely to purchase a product if it were linked to the Olympics.
25. The Georgia study was done by Rosen and Tesser (1970).
26. From Asimov (1975).
27. Both the sweatshirt and the pronoun experiments are reported
fully in Cialdini et al. (1976).

220 / Influence
CHAPTER 6 (PAGES 208–236)

1. The quote is from Milgram’s 1963 article in the Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology.
2. All of these variations on the basic experiment, as well as several
others, are presented in Milgram’s highly readable book Obedience to
Authority, 1974. A review of much of the subsequent research on obedience can be found in Blass (1991).
3. In fact, Milgram first began his investigations in an attempt to understand how the German citizenry could have participated in the
concentration-camp destruction of millions of innocents during the
years of Nazi ascendancy. After testing his experimental procedures in
the United States, he had planned to take them to Germany, a country
whose populace he was sure would provide enough obedience for a
full-blown scientific analysis of the concept. That first eye-opening experiment in New Haven, Connecticut, however, made it clear that he
could save his money and stay close to home. “I found so much obedience,” he has said, “I hardly saw the need of taking the experiment to
Germany.”
More telling evidence, perhaps, of a willingness within the American
character to submit to authorized command comes from a national
survey taken after the trial of Lieutenant William Calley, who ordered
his soldiers to kill the inhabitants—from the infants and toddlers
through their parents and grandparents—of My Lai, Vietnam (Kelman
and Hamilton, 1989). A majority of Americans (51 percent) responded
that, if so ordered, in a similar context, they too would shoot all the
residents of a Vietnamese village. But Americans have no monopoly
on the need to obey. When Milgram’s basic procedure has been repeated
in Holland, Germany, Spain, Italy, Australia, and Jordan, the results
have been similar. See Meeus and Raaijmakers for a review.
4. We are not the only species to give sometimes wrongheaded deference to those in authority positions. In monkey colonies, where rigid
dominance hierarchies exist, beneficial innovations (like learning how
to use a stick to bring food into the cage area) do not spread quickly
through the group unless they are taught first to a dominant animal.
When a lower animal is taught the new concept first, the rest of the
colony remains mostly oblivious to its value. One study, cited by Ardry
(1970), on the introduction of new food tastes to Japanese monkeys
provides a nice illustration. In one troop, a taste for caramels was developed by introducing this new food into the diet of young peripherals,
low on the status ladder. The taste for caramels inched slowly up the
ranks: A year and a half later, only 51 percent of the colony had acquired

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 221
it, and still none of the leaders. Contrast this with what happened in a
second troop where wheat was introduced first to the leader: Wheat
eating—to this point unknown to these monkeys—spread through the
whole colony within four hours.
5. The experiment was performed by Wilson (1968).
6. The study on children’s judgments of coins was done by Bruner
and Goodman (1947). The study on college students’ judgments was
done by Dukes and Bevan (1952). In addition to the relationship between
importance (status) and perceived size that both of these experiments
show, there is even some evidence that the importance we assign to
our identity is reflected in the size of a frequent symbol of that identity:
our signature. The psychologist Richard Zweigenhaft (1970) has collected data suggesting that as a man’s sense of his own status grows, so
does the size of his signature. This finding may give us a secret way of
discovering how the people around us view their own status and importance: Simply compare the size of their signature to that of their
other handwriting.
7. Subhumans are not alone in this regard, even in modern times. For
example, since 1900 the U.S. presidency has been won by the taller of
the major-party candidates in twenty-one of the twenty-four elections.
8. From Hofling et al. (1966).
9. Additional data collected in the same study suggest that nurses
may not be conscious of the extent to which the title Doctor sways their
judgments and actions. A separate group of thirty-three nurses and
student nurses were asked what they would have done in the experimental situation. Contrary to the actual findings, only two predicted
that they would have given the medication as ordered.
10. See Bickman (1974) for a complete account of this research. Similar
results have been obtained when the requester was female (Bushman,
1988).
11. This experiment was conducted by Lefkowitz, Blake, and Mouton
(1955).
12. The horn-honking study was published in 1968 by Anthony Doob
and Alan Gross.
13. For evidence, see Choo (1964), and McGuinnies and Ward (1980).
14. See Settle and Gorden (1974), Smith and Hunt (1978), and Hunt,
Domzal, and Kernan (1981).
CHAPTER 7 (PAGES 237–272)

1. The home-insulation study was done by Gonzales, Costanzo, and
Aronson (1988) in northern California; the breast-examination work
was conducted by Meyerwitz and Chaiken (1987) in New York City.

222 / Influence
2. See Schwartz (1980) for evidence of such a process.
3. See Lynn (1989). Without wishing to minimize the advantages of
this type of shortcut or the dangers associated with it, I should note
that these advantages and dangers are essentially the same ones we
have examined in previous chapters. Accordingly, I will not focus on
this theme in the remainder of the present chapter, except to say at this
point that the key to using properly the shortcut feature of scarcity is
to be alert to the distinction between naturally occurring, honest scarcity
and the fabricated variety favored by certain compliance practitioners.
4. The original reactance-theory formulation appeared in Brehm
(1966); a subsequent version appears in Brehm and Brehm (1981).
5. Brehm and Weintraub (1977) did the barrier experiment. It should
be noted that two-year-old girls in the study did not show the same
resistant response to the large barrier as did the boys. This does not
seem to be because girls don’t oppose attempts to limit their freedoms.
Instead, it appears that they are primarily reactant to restrictions that
come from other people rather than from physical barriers (Brehm,
1983).
6. For descriptions of the two-year-old’s change in self-perception,
see Mahler et al. (1975), Lewis and Brooks-Gunn (1979), Brooks-Gun
and Lewis (1982), and Levine (1983).
7. The occurrence of the Romeo and Juliet effect should not be interpreted as a warning to parents to be always accepting of their teenagers’
romantic choices. New players at this delicate game are likely to err
often and, consequently, would benefit from the direction of an adult
with greater perspective and experience. In providing such direction,
parents should recognize that teenagers, who see themselves as young
adults, will not respond well to control attempts that are typical of
parent-child relationships. Especially in the clearly adult arena of mating, adult tools of influence (preference and persuasion) will be more
effective than traditional forms of parental control (prohibitions and
punishments). Although the experience of the Montague and Capulet
families is an extreme example, heavy-handed restrictions on a young
romantic alliance may well turn it clandestine, torrid, and sad.
A full description of the Colorado couples study can be found in
Driscoll et al. (1972).
8. See Mazis (1975) and Mazis et al. (1973) for formal reports of the
phosphate study.
9. For evidence, see Ashmore et al. (1971), Wicklund and Brehm
(1974), Worchel and Arnold (1973), Worchel et al. (1975), and Worchel
(1991).
10. The Purdue study was done by Zellinger et al. (1974).

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 223
11. The University of Chicago jury experiment on inadmissible
evidence was reported by Broeder (1959).
12. The initial statements of commodity theory appeared in Brock
(1968) and Fromkin and Brock (1971). For an updated statement, see
Brock and Bannon (1992).
13. For ethical reasons, the information provided to the customers
was always true. There was an impending beef shortage and this news
had, indeed, come to the company through its exclusive sources. See
Knishinsky (1982) for full details of the project.
14. Worchel et al. (1975).
15. See Davies (1962, 1969).
16. See Lytton (1979), and Rosenthal and Robertson (1959).
17. The quote comes from MacKenzie (1974).
EPILOGUE (PAGES 273–280)

1. For evidence of such perceptual and decisional narrowing see
Berkowitz (1967), Bodenhausen (1990), Cohen (1978), Easterbrook (1959),
Gilbert and Osborn (1989), Hockey and Hamilton (1970), Mackworth
(1965), Milgram (1970), and Tversky and Kahnemann (1974).
2. Quoted in the PBS-TV documentary The Information Society.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Altheide, D. L., and J. M. Johnson. “Counting Souls: A Study of Counseling at Evangelical Crusades.” Pacific Sociological Review 20 (1977):
323–48.
Ardry, R. The Social Contract. New York: Atheneum, 1970.
Aronson, E. “The Jigsaw Route to Learning and Liking.” Psychology
Today, Feb. 1975.
——, D. L. Bridgeman, and R. Geffner. “The Effects of a Cooperative
Classroom Structure on Students’ Behavior and Attitudes.” In Social
Psychology of Education: Theory and Research, edited by D. Bar-Tal and
L. Saxe. New York: Halstead Press, 1978.
——. “Interdependent Interactions and Prosocial Behavior.” Journal of
Research and Development in Education 12 (1978): 16–27.
Aronson, E., and D. L. Linder. “Gain and Loss of Esteem as Determinants
of Interpersonal Attractiveness.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 1 (1965): 156–71.
Aronson, E., and J. Mills. “The Effect of Severity of Initiation on Liking
for a Group.” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 59 (1959):
177–81.
Aronson, E. et al. The Jigsaw Classroom. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications,
1978.
Ashmore, R. D., V. Ramchandra, and R. A. Jones. “Censorship as an
Attitude Change Induction.” Paper presented at Eastern Psychological
Association meetings, New York, April 1971.
Asimov, I. “The Miss America Pageant.” TV Guide, Aug. 30, 1975.
Bandura, A., J. E. Grusec, and F. L. Menlove. “Vicarious Extinction of
Avoidance Behavior.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 5
(1967): 16–23.
Bandura, A., and F. L. Menlove. “Factors Determining Vicarious Extinction of Avoidance Behavior Through Symbolic Modeling.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 8 (1968): 99–108.
Benson, P. L., S. A. Karabenic, and R. M. Lerner. “Pretty Pleases: The

226 / Influence
Effects of Physical Attractiveness on Race, Sex, and Receiving Help.”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 12 (1976): 409–15.
Benton, A. A., H. H. Kelley, and B. Liebling. “Effects of Extremity of
Offers and Concession Rate on the Outcomes of Bargaining.” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 24 (1972): 73–83.
Berkowitz, L., and R. W. Buck. “Impulsive Aggression: Reactivity to
Aggressive Cues Under Emotional Arousal.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 35 (1967): 415–24.
Berry, S. H., and D. E. Kanouse. “Physician Response to a Mailed Survey:
An Experiment in Timing of Payment.” Public Opinion Quarterly 51
(1987): 102–14.
Bickman, L. “The Social Power of a Uniform.” Journal of Applied Social
Psychology 4 (1974): 47–61.
Blass, T. “Understanding Behavior in the Milgram Obedience Experiment.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 60 (1991): 398–413.
Bodenhausen, G. V. “Stereotypes as Judgmental Heuristics: Evidence
of Circadian Variations in Discrimination.” Psychological Science 1
(1990): 319–22.
Bollen, K. A., and D. P. Phillips. “Imitative Suicides: A National Study
of the Effects of Television News Stories.” American Sociological Review
47 (1982): 802–09.
Bornstein, R. F. “Exposure and Affect.” Psychological Bulletin 106 (1989):
265–89.
——, D. R. Leone, and D. J. Galley. “The Generalizability of Subliminal
Mere Exposure Effects.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53
(1987): 1070–79.
Brehm, J. W. A Theory of Psychological Reactance. New York: Academic
Press, 1966.
Brehm, S. S. “Psychological Reactance and the Attractiveness of Unattainable Objects: Sex Differences in Children’s Responses to an
Elimination of Freedom.” Sex Roles 7 (1981): 937–49.
——, and J. W. Brehm. Psychological Reactance. New York: Academic
Press, 1981.
Brehm, S. S., and M. Weintraub. “Physical Barriers and Psychological
Reactance: Two-year-olds’ Responses to Threats to Freedom.” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 35 (1977): 830–36.
Brock, T. C. “Implications of Commodity Theory for Value Change.”
In Psychological Foundations of Attitudes, edited by A. G. Greenwald,
T. C. Brock, and T. M. Ostrom. New York: Academic Press, 1968.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 227
——, and L. A. Brannon. “Liberalization of Commodity Theory.” Basic
and Applied Social Psychology 13 (1992): 135–43.
Broeder, D. “The University of Chicago Jury Project.” Nebraska Law Review 38 (1959): 760–74.
Brooks-Gunn, J., and M. Lewis. “The Development of Self-Knowledge.”
In The Child, edited by C. B. Kopp and J. B. Krakow. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1982.
Brownstein, R., and R. Katzev. “The Relative Effectiveness of Three
Compliance Techniques in Eliciting Donations to a Cultural Organization.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 15 (1985): 564–74.
Bruner, J. S., and C. C. Goodman. “Value and Need as Organizing
Factors in Perception.” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 42
(1947): 33–44.
Burger, J. M., and R. E. Petty. “The Low-Ball Compliance Technique:
Task or Person Commitment?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 40 (1981): 492–500.
Burgess, T., and S. Sales. “Attitudinal Effects of ‘Mere Exposure’: A
Reevaluation.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 7 (1971):
461–72.
Bushman, B. A. “The Effects of Apparel on Compliance.” Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin 14 (1988): 459–67.
Chaiken, S. “Communicator Physical Attractiveness and Persuasion.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (1979): 1387–97.
——, and C. Stangor. “Attitudes and Attitude Change.” Annual Review
of Psychology 38 (1987): 575–630.
Choo, T. “Communicator Credibility and Communication Discrepancy
as Determinants of Opinion Change.” Journal of Social Psychology 64
(1964): 1–20.
Cialdini, R. B. “Full Cycle Social Psychology,” Applied Social Psychology
Annual, Vol. 1, ed. L. Beckman. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1980.
——, and K. Ascani. “Test of a Concession Procedure for Inducing
Verbal, Behavioral, and Further Compliance with a Request to Give
Blood.” Journal of Applied Psychology 61 (1976): 295–300.
Cialdini, R. B., R. R. Reno, and C. A. Kallgren. “A Focus Theory of
Normative Conduct: Recycling the Concept of Norms to Reduce
Littering in Public Places.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
58 (1990): 1015–26.
Cialdini, R. B. et al. “Basking in Reflected Glory: Three (Football) Field
Studies.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 34 (1976): 366–75.

228 / Influence
Cialdini, R. B. et al. “The Low-Ball Procedure for Producing Compliance:
Commitment, Then Cost.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
36 (1978): 463–76.
Cialdini, R. B. et al. “Reciprocal Concessions Procedure for Inducing
Compliance: The Door-in-the-Face Technique.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 31 (1975): 206–15.
——. “Why Don’t Bystanders Help? Because of Ambiguity?” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 24 (1972): 392–400.
Clark, M. S., J. R. Mills, and D. M. Corcoran. “Keeping Track of Needs
and Inputs of Friends and Strangers.” Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 15 (1989): 533–42.
Clark, R. D. III, and L. E. Word. “Where Is the Apathetic Bystander?
Situational Characteristics of the Emergency.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 29 (1974): 279–87.
Cohen, M., and N. Davis. Medication Errors: Causes and Prevention.
Philadelphia: G. F. Stickley, 1981.
Cohen, S. “Environmental Load and the Allocation of Attention,” Advances in Environmental Psychology, Vol. 1, ed. A. Baum, J. E. Singer,
and S. Valins. New York: Halstead Press, 1978.
Cook, S. W. “Interpersonal and Attitudinal Outcomes in Cooperating
Interracial Groups.” Journal of Research and Development in Education
12 (1978): 97–113.
——. “Toward a Psychology of Improving Justice.” Journal of Social Issues
46 (1990): 147–61.
Crane, D. Invisible Colleges. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972.
Darley, J. M., and B. Latan. “Bystander Intervention in Emergencies:
Diffusion of Responsibility.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
8 (1968): 377–83.
Davies, J. C. “The J-Curve of Rising and Declining Satisfactions as a
Cause of Some Great Revolutions and a Contained Rebellion.” In
Violence in America, edited by H. D. Graham and T. R. Gurr. New
York: Signet Books, 1969.
——. “Toward a Theory of Revolution.” American Sociological Review
27 (1962): 5–19.
Deutsch, M., and H. B. Gerard, “A Study of Normative and Informational Social Influences upon Individual Judgment.” Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology 51 (1955): 629–36.
De Vries, D. L., and R. E. Slavin. “Teams-Games-Tournaments (TGT):

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 229
Review of Ten Classroom Experiments.” Journal of Research and Development in Education 12 (1978): 28–38.
Dion, K. K. “Physical Attractiveness and Evaluation of Children’s
Transgressions.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 24 (1972):
207–13.
Doob, A. N., and A. E. Gross. “Status of Frustrator as an Inhibitor of
Horn-Honking Responses.” Journal of Social Psychology 76 (1968):
213–18.
Drachman, D., A. deCarufel, and C. A. Inkso. “The Extra Credit Effect
in Interpersonal Attraction.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
14 (1978): 458–67.
Driscoll, R., K. E. Davies, and M. E. Lipetz. “Parental Interference and
Romantic Love: The Romeo and Juliet Effect.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 24 (1972): 1–10.
Dukes, W. F., and W. Bevan. “Accentuation and Response Variability
in the Perception of Personally Relevant Objects.” Journal of Personality
20 (1952): 457–65.
Eagly, A. H., et al. “What Is Beautiful Is Good, but…: A Meta-Analytic
Review of Research on the Physical Attractiveness Stereotype.” Psychological Bulletin 110 (1990): 109–28.
Easterbrook, J. A. “The Effects of Emotion on Cue Utilization and the
Organization of Behavior.” Psychological Review 66 (1959): 183–201.
Efran, M. G., and E.W.J. Patterson. “The Politics of Appearance.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Toronto, 1976.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. “Der Fisch Aspidontus taeniatus als Machahmer des
Putzers Labroides dimidiatus.” Zeitschrift fuer Tierpsychologie 16 (1959):
19–25.
Emswiller, T., K. Deaux, and J. E. Willits. “Similarity, Sex, and Requests
for Small Favors.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology (1971): 284–91.
Evans, F. B. American Behavioral Scientist 6:7 (1963): 76–79.
Festinger, L., H. W. Riecken, and S. Schachter. When Prophecy Fails.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1956.
Fox, M. W. Concepts in Ethology: Animal and Human Behavior. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1974.
Freedman, J. L. “Long-term Behavioral Effects of Cognitive Dissonance.”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 4 (1966): 195–203.
——, and S. C. Fraser. “Compliance Without Pressure: The Foot-in-theDoor Technique.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 4 (1966):
195–203.

230 / Influence
Fromkin, H. L., and T. C. Brock. “A Commodity Theory Analysis of
Persuasion.” Representative Research in Social Psychology 2 (1971): 47–57.
Fuller, R.G.C., and A. Sheehy-Skeffinton. “Effects of Group Laughter
on Responses to Humorous Materials: A Replication and Extension.”
Psychological Reports 35 (1974): 531–34.
George, W. H., S. J. Gournic, and M. P. McAfee “Perceptions of
Postdrinking Female Sexuality.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology
18 (1988): 1295–1317.
Gerard, H. B., and G. C. Mathewson. “The Effects of Severity of Initiation
on Liking for a Group: A Replication.” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 2 (1966): 278–87.
Gerard, H. B., and N. Miller. School Desegregation. New York: Plenum,
1975.
Gergen, K. et al. “Obligation, Donor Resources, and Reactions to Aid
in Three Cultures.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 31 (1975):
390–400.
Gilbert, D. T., and R. E. Osborne. “Thinking Backward: Some Curable
and Incurable Consequences of Cognitive Busyness.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57 (1989): 940–49.
Gonzales, M. H., E. Aronson, and M. Costanzo. “Increasing the Effectiveness of Energy Auditors: A Field Experiment.” Journal of Applied
Social Psychology 18 (1988): 1046–66.
Gonzales, M. H. et al. “Interactional Approach to Interpersonal Attraction.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 44 (1983): 1192–97.
Gordon, R. E., and K. Gordon. The Blight on the Ivy. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1963.
Gould, M. S., and D. Schaffer. “The Impact of Suicide in Television
Movies.” The New England Journal of Medicine 315 (1986): 690–94.
Gouldner, A. W. “The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement.”
American Sociological Review 25 (1960): 161–78.
Green, F. “The ‘Foot-in-the-Door’ Technique.” American Salesman 10
(1965): 14–16.
Greenberg, M. S., and S. P. Shapiro. “Indebtedness: An Adverse Aspect
of Asking for and Receiving Help.” Sociometry 34 (1971): 290–301.
Greenwald, A. F. et al. “Increasing Voting Behavior by Asking People
if They Expect to Vote.” Journal of Applied Psychology 72 (1987):
315–318.
Grush, J. E. “Impact of Candidate Expenditures, Regionality, and Prior

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 231
Outcomes on the 1976 Democratic Presidential Primaries.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 38 (1980): 337–47.
——, K. L. McKeough, and R. F. Ahlering. “Extrapolating Laboratory
Exposure Experiments to Actual Political Elections.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 36 (1978): 257–70.
Hockey, G.R.J., and P. Hamilton. “Arousal and Information Selection
in Short-term Memory.” Nature 226 (1970): 866–67.
Hofling, C. K. et al. “An Experimental Study of Nurse-Physician Relationships.” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 143 (1966): 171–80.
Hlldobler, B. “Communication Between Ants and Their Guests.” Scientific American 198 (Jan.) (1971): 68–76.
Hornaday, W. T. “The Extermination of the American Bison, with a
Sketch of Its Discovery and Life History.” Smithsonian Report, 1887,
Part II, 367–548.
Hornstein, H. A., E. Fisch, and M. Holmes. “Influence of a Model’s
Feeling About His Behavior and His Relevance as a Comparison
Other on Observers’ Helping Behavior.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 10 (1968): 222–26.
Howard, D. J. “The Influence of Verbal Responses to Common Greetings
on Compliance Behavior: The Foot-in-the-Mouth Effect.” Journal of
Applied Social Psychology 20 (1990): 1185–96.
Hunt, J. M., T.J. Domzal, and J. B. Kernan. “Causal Attribution and
Persuasion: The Case of Disconfirmed Expectancies,” Advances in
Consumer Research, Vol. 9, ed. A. Mitchell. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Association for Consumer Research, 1981.
Johnson, D. W., and R. T. Johnson. Learning Together and Learning Alone.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1975.
——. “The Socialization and Achievement Crisis: Are Cooperative
Learning Experiences the Solution?” Applied Social Psychology Annual,
Vol. 4, ed. L. Bickman. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1983.
Jones, E. E., and V. E. Harris. “The Attribution of Attitudes.” Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 3 (1967): 1–24.
Jones, E. E., and C. Wortman. Ingratiation: An Attributional Approach.
Morristown, N.J.: General Learning Corp., 1973.
Joule, R. V. “Tobacco Deprivation: The Foot-in-the-Door Technique
Versus the Low-Ball Technique.” European Journal of Social Psychology
17 (1987): 361–65.
Kelman, H. C., and V. L. Hamilton. Crimes of Obedience. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1989.

232 / Influence
Kelman, J., and L. Lawrence. “Assignment of Responsibility in the Case
of Lt. Calley: Preliminary Report on a National Survey.” Journal of
Social Issues 28:1 (1978).
Kenrick, D. T., and S. E. Gutierres. “Contrast Effects in Judgments of
Attractiveness: When Beauty Becomes a Social Problem.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 38 (1980): 131–40.
——, and L. L. Goldberg. “Influence of Popular Erotica on Judgments
of Strangers and Mates.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 25
(1989): 159–67.
Kerr, N. L., and R. J. MacCoun. “The Effects of Jury Size and Polling
Method on the Process and Product of Jury Deliberation.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 48 (1985): 349–63.
Knishinsky, A. “The Effects of Scarcity of Material and Exclusivity of
Information on Industrial Buyer Perceived Risk in Provoking a Purchase Decision.” Doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University, 1982.
Knox, R. E., and J. A. Inkster. “Postdecisional Dissonance at Post Time.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 8 (1968): 319–23.
Kraut, R. E. “Effects of Social Labeling on Giving to Charity.” Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology 9 (1973): 551–62.
Kulka, R. A., and J. R. Kessler. “Is Justice Really Blind? The Effect of
Litigant Physical Attractiveness on Judicial Judgment.” Journal of
Applied Social Psychology 4 (1978): 336–81.
Kunz, P. R., and M. Woolcott. “Season’s Greetings: From My Status to
Yours.” Social Science Research, 5 (1976): 269–78.
Kurtzburg, R. L., H. Safar, and N. Cavior. “Surgical and Social Rehabilitation of Adult Offenders.” Proceedings of the 76th Annual Convention
of the American Psychological Association 3 (1968): 649–50.
Lack, D. The Life of the Robin. London: Cambridge University Press, 1943.
LaFrance, M. “Postural Mirroring and Intergroup Relations.” Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin 11 (1985): 207–17.
Langer, E. J. “Rethinking the Role of Thought in Social Interaction,”
New Directions in Attribution Research, Vol. 2., ed., Harvey, Ickes, and
Kidd. Potomac, Md.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1978.
——. “Minding Matters,” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
Vol. 22, ed. L. Berkowitz. New York: Academic Press, 1989.
Latan, B., and J. M. Darley. “Group Inhibition of Bystander Intervention
in Emergencies.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 10 (1968):
215–21.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 233
——. The Unresponsive Bystander: Why Doesn’t He Help? New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1968.
Latan, B., and J. Rodin. “A Lady in Distress: Inhibiting Effects of Friends
and Strangers on Bystander Intervention.” Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology 5 (1969): 189–202.
Leakey, R., and R. Lewin. People of the Lake. New York: Anchor
Press/Doubleday, 1978.
Lefkowitz, M., R. R. Blake, and J. S. Mouton. “Status Factors in Pedestrian Violation of Traffic Signals.” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 51 (1955): 704–06.
Levine, L. E. “Mine: Self-Definition in Two-Year-Old Boys.” Developmental Psychology 19 (1983): 544–49.
Lewis, M., and J. Brooks-Gunn. Social Cognition and the Acquisition of
Self. New York: Plenum, 1979.
Liebert, R., and R. A. Baron. “Some Immediate Effects of Televised Violence on Children’s Behavior.” Developmental Psychology 6 (1972):
469–75.
Lloyd, J. E. “Aggressive Mimicry in Photuris: Firefly Femme Fatales.”
Science 149 (1965): 653–54.
Locke, K. S., and L. M. Horowitz. “Satisfaction in Interpersonal Interactions as a Function of Similarity in Level of Dysphoria. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 58 (1990): 823–31.
Lott, A. J., and B. E. Lott. “Group Cohesiveness as Interpersonal Attraction: A Review of Relationships with Antecedent and Consequent
Variables.” Psychological Bulletin 64 (1965): 259–309.
Lytton, J. “Correlates of Compliance and the Rudiments of Conscience
in Two-Year-Old Boys.” Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science 9 (1979):
242–51.
McGuinnies, E., and C. D. Ward. “Better Liked Than Right: Trustworthiness and Expertise as Factors in Credibility.” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 6 (1980): 467–72.
Mack, D., and D. Rainey. “Female Applicants’ Grooming and Personnel
Selection.” Journal of Social Behavior and Personality 5 (1990): 399–407.
MacKenzie, B. “When Sober Executives Went on a Bidding Binge.” TV
Guide, June 22, 1974.
Mackworth, N. H. “Visual Noise Causes Tunnel Vision.” Psychonomic
Science 3 (1965): 67–68.
Macrae, N. “Multinational Business.” The Economist (London), Jan. 22,
1972.

234 / Influence
Magruder, J. S. An American Life: One Man’s Road to Watergate. New
York: Atheneum, 1974.
Mahler, M. S., F. Pine, and A. Bergman. The Psychological Birth of the Infant. New York: Basic Books, 1975.
Manis, M., S. D. Cornell, and J. C. Moore. “Transmission of Attitude
Relevant Information Through a Communication Chain.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 30 (1974): 81–94.
Mauss, Marcel. The Gift, trans. I. G. Cunnison. London: Cohen and West,
1954.
Mazis, M. B. “Antipollution Measures and Psychological Reactance
Theory: A Field Experiment.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 31 (1975): 654–66.
——, R. B. Settle, and D. C. Leslie. “Elimination of Phosphate Detergents
and Psychological Reactance.” Journal of Marketing Research 10 (1973):
390–95.
Meeus, W.H.J., and Q.A.W. Raaijmakers. “Administrative Obedience:
Carrying Out Orders to Use Psychological-Administrative Violence.”
European Journal of Social Psychology 16 (1986): 311–24.
Melamed, B. F. et al. “The Effects of Film Modeling on the Reduction
of Anxiety-related Behaviors.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 46 (1978): 1357–74.
Milgram, S. “Behavorial Study of Obedience.” Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology 67 (1963): 371–78.
——. “The Experience of Living in Cities.” Science 13 (1970): 1461–68.
——. Obedience to Authority. New York: Harper & Row, 1974.
——, L. Bickman, and O. Berkowitz. “Note on the Drawing Power of
Crowds of Different Size.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
13 (1969): 79–82.
Milgram, S., and J. Sabini. “On Maintaining Norms: A Field Experiment
in the Subway.” Unpublished manuscript, City University of New
York, 1975.
Miller, N. et al. “Similarity, Contrast, and Complementarity in Friendship Choice.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 3 (1966): 3–12.
Miller, R. L. et al. “Perceptual Contrast Versus Reciprocal Concession
as Mediators of Induced Compliance.” Canadian Journal of Behavioral
Science 8 (1976): 401–09.
Mita, T. H., M. Dermer, and J. Knight. “Reversed Facial Images and the
Mere Exposure Hypothesis.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
35 (1977): 597–601.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 235
Monahan, F. Women in Crime. New York: Ives Washburn, 1941.
Moriarty, T. “Crime, Commitment, and the Responsive Bystander.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 31 (1975): 370–76.
Murray, D. A. et al. “The Prevention of Cigarette Smoking in Children:
A Comparison of Four Strategies.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology
14 (1984): 274–88.
Nosanchuk, T. A., and J. Lightstone. “Canned Laughter and Public and
Private Conformity.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 29
(1974): 153–56.
O’Connor, R. D. “Relative Efficacy of Modeling, Shaping, and the
Combined Procedures for Modification of Social Withdrawal.”
Journal of Abnormal Psychology 79 (1972): 327–34.
Packard, V. The Hidden Persuaders. New York: D. McKay Co., 1957.
Pallak, M. S., D. A. Cook, and J. J. Sullivan. “Commitment and Energy
Conservation.” Applied Social Psychology Annual 1 (1980): 235–53.
Peiponen, V. A. “Verhaltensstudien am blaukehlchen.” Ornis Fennica
37 (1960): 69–83.
Pekkanen, J. The Best Doctors in the U.S. New York: Seaview Books, 1971.
Pennebaker, J. W. et al. “Don’t the Girls Get Prettier at Closing Time.”
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 5 (1979): 122–25.
Phillips, D. P. “Airplane Accidents, Murder, and the Mass Media: Towards a Theory of Imitation and Suggestion.” Social Forces 58 (1980):
1001–24.
——. “The Impact of Mass Media Violence on U.S. Homicides.” American Sociological Review 48 (1983): 560–68.
——. “The Influence of Suggestion on Suicide: Substantive and Theoretical Implications of the Werther Effect.” American Sociological Review
39 (1974): 340–54.
——. “Suicide, Motor Vehicle Fatalities, and the Mass Media: Evidence
Toward a Theory of Suggestion.” American Journal of Sociology 84
(1979): 1150–74.
——, and L. L. Carstensen. “The Effect of Suicide Stories on Various
Demographic Groups, 1968–1985.” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 18 (1988): 100–14.
Razran, G.H.S. “Conditioned Response Changes in Rating and Appraising Sociopolitical Slogans.” Psychological Bulletin 37 (1940): 481.
——. “Conditioning Away Social Bias by the Luncheon Technique.”
Psychological Bulletin 35 (1938): 693.

236 / Influence
Regan, D. T. “Effects of a Favor and Liking on Compliance.” Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 7 (1971): 627–39.
Rich, J. “Effects of Children’s Physical Attractiveness on Teachers’
Evaluations.” Journal of Educational Psychology 67 (1975): 599–609.
Rosen, S., and A. Tesser. “On the Reluctance to Communicate Undesirable Information: The MUM Effect.” Sociometry 33 (1970): 253–63.
Rosenfeld, P., J. G. Kennedy, and R. A. Giacalone. “Decision Making:
A Demonstration of the Postdecision Dissonance Effect.” Journal of
Social Psychology 126 (1986): 663–65.
Rosenfield, D., and W. G. Stephan. “Intergroup Relations Among
Children.” In Developmental Social Psychology, edited by S. Brehm, S.
Kassin, and F. Gibbons. New York: Oxford University Press, 1981.
Rosenthal, A. M. Thirty-eight Witnesses. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Rosenthal, M. J., E. Ni, and R. E. Robertson. “A Study of Mother-Child
Relationships in the Emotional Disorders of Children.” Genetic Psychology Monographs 60 (1959): 65–116.
Ross, A. S. “Effect of Increased Responsibility on Bystander Intervention:
The Presence of Children.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
19 (1971): 306–10.
Russell, D. “Leave It to the Merry Prankster, the Artful Dodger, and
the Body Puncher,” TV Guide, Dec. 16, 1978.
Sabin, R. The International Cyclopedia of Music and Musicians. New York:
Dodd, Mead, 1964.
Schein, E. “The Chinese Indoctrination Program for Prisoners of War:
A Study of Attempted ‘Brainwashing.’” Psychiatry 19 (1956): 149–72.
Schmidtke, A., and H. Hafner. “The Werther Effect After Television
Films: New Evidence for an Old Hypothesis.” Psychological Medicine
18 (1988): 665–76.
Schwarz, N. “Experimentelle Untersuchungen zur Reduktion durch
Freiheitswerderstellung.” Doctoral dissertation, Universitt Mannheim, 1980.
Schwarzwald, J., M. Raz, and M. Zvibel. “The Efficacy of the Door-inthe-Face Technique When Established Behavioral Customs Exist.”
Journal of Applied Social Psychology 9 (1979): 576–86.
Segal, H. A. “Initial Psychiatric Findings of Recently Repatriated Prisoners of War.” American Journal of Psychiatry 61 (1954): 358–63.
Settle, R. B., and L. L. Gorden. “Attribution Theory and Advertiser
Credibility.” Journal of Marketing Research 11 (1974): 181–85.

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 237
Sherif, M. et al. Intergroup Conflict and Cooperation: The Robbers’ Cave
Experiment. Norman, Okla.: University of Oklahoma Institute of Intergroup Relations, 1961.
Sherman, S. J. “On the Self-Erasing Nature of Errors of Prediction.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39 (1980): 211–21.
Smith, G. H., and R. Engel. “Influence of a Female Model on Perceived
Characteristics of an Automobile.” Proceedings of the 76th Annual
Convention of the American Psychological Association 3 (1968): 681–82.
Smith, M. M., and R.G.C. Fuller. “Effects of Group Laughter on Responses to Humorous Materials.” Psychological Reports 30 (1972):
132–34.
Smith, R. E., and S. D. Hunt. “Attributional Processes in Promotional
Situations.” Journal of Consumer Research 5 (1978): 149–58.
Stephan, W. G. “School Desegregation: An Evaluation of Predictions
Made in Brown v. Board of Education.” Psychological Bulletin 85 (1978):
217–38.
Stewart, J. E., II. “Defendant’s Attractiveness as a Factor in the Outcome
of Trials.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 10 (1980): 348–61.
Styron, W. “A Farewell to Arms.” New York Review of Books 24 (1977):
3–4.
Suedfeld, P., S. Bochner, and C. Matas. “Petitioner’s Attire and Petition
Signing by Peace Demonstrators: A Field Experiment.” Journal of
Applied Social Psychology 1 (1971): 278–8.
Swap, W. C. “Interpersonal Attraction and Repeated Exposure to Rewards and Punishers.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 3
(1977): 248–51.
Tiger, L., and R. Fox. The Imperial Animal. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, 1971.
Toffler, A. Future Shock. New York: Random House, 1970.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahnemann. “Judgment Under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases.” Science 185 (1974): 1124–31.
Walker, M. G. “Organizational Type, Rites of Incorporation, and Group
Solidarity: A Study of Fraternity Hell Week.” Doctoral dissertation,
University of Washington, 1967.
West, C. K. The Social and Psychological Distortion of Information. Chicago:
Nelson-Hall, 1981.
Whiting, J.W.M., R. Klukhohn, and A. Anthony. “The Function of Male
Initiation Cermonies at Puberty.” In Readings in Social Psychology,

238 / Influence
edited by E. E. Maccoby, T. M. Newcomb, and E. L. Hartley. New
York: Holt, 1958.
Whitney, R. A., T. Hubin, and J. D. Murphy. The New Psychology of Persuasion and Motivation in Selling. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1965.
Wicklund, R. A., and J. C. Brehm. Cited in Wicklund, R. A., Freedom and
Reactance. Potomac, Md.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1974.
Wilson, P. R., “The Perceptual Distortion of Height as a Function of
Ascribed Academic Status.” Journal of Social Psychology 74 (1968):
97–102.
Wilson, T. D. et al. “Introspection, Attitude Change, and Behavior
Consistency,” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 22, ed.
L. Berkowitz. San Diego: Academic Press, 1989.
Wilson, W. R. “Feeling More Than We Can Know: Exposure Effects
Without Learning.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37
(1979): 811–21.
Woodside, A. G., and J. W. Davenport. “Effects of Salesman Similarity
and Expertise on Consumer Purchasing Behavior.” Journal of Marketing
Research 11 (1974): 198–202.
Worchel, S. “Beyond a Commodity Theory Analysis of Censorship:
When Abundance and Personalism Enhance Scarcity Effects.” Basic
and Applied Social Psychology 13 (1992): 79–90.
——, and S. E. Arnold. “The Effects of Censorship and the Attractiveness
of the Censor on Attitude Change.” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 9 (1973): 365–77.
——, and M. Baker. “The Effect of Censorship on Attitude Change: The
Influence of Censor and Communicator Characteristics.” Journal of
Applied Social Psychology 5 (1975): 222–39.
Worchel, S., J. Lee, and A. Adewole. “Effects of Supply and Demand
on Ratings of Object Value.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
32 (1975): 906–14.
Young, F. W. Initiation Ceremonies. New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965.
Zajonc, R. B. “The Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology Monographs 9:2 (part 2) (1968).
——. “Feeling and Thinking: Preferences Need No Inferences.” American
Psychologist 35 (1980): 151–75.
——, H. Markus, and W. R. Wilson. “Exposure Effects and Associative
Learning.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 10 (1974): 248–63.
Zellinger, D. A. et al. “A Commodity Theory Analysis of the Effects of

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 239
Age Restrictions on Pornographic Materials.” Institute for Research
in the Behavioral, Economic and Management Sciences, Purdue
University, Paper No. 440, 1974.
Zweigenhaft, R. L. “Signature Size: A Key to Status Awareness.”
Journal of Social Psychology 81 (1970): 49–54.

INDEX
Note: Entries in this index, carried over verbatim from the print edition of this title,
are unlikely to correspond to the pagination of any given e-book reader. However,
entries in this index, and other terms, may be easily located by using the search
feature of your e-book reader.

Abrams, Robert, 243
advertising:
age restrictions in, 252–253
association and, 191
average-person testimonials in, 140, 160–161
of claqueurs, 159
health authority in, 220, 221, 230–231
social proof and, 117, 140, 159, 160–161
toy, 65, 66
Advertising Age, 289n
aggression:
physical attractiveness and, 172
similarity and, 151
aid, see favors, gifts, and aid
airline crashes, suicide and, 144–147, 149–151
Allen, Irwin, 264
Ambrose, Mike, 190
American Broadcasting Company (ABC), 264–265
American Cancer Society, 68
American Salesman, 72
Amway Corporation, 27–29, 79
Anabaptists, 286n
animal behavior:
authority and, 223, 290n
competition and, 262–263
trigger features and, 2–4, 8–9, 273, 281n
Anthony, A., 85–86
anthropology, rule of reciprocation in, 18
antiphosphate ordinance, psychological reactance and, 250–251
antismoking study, 142, 287n
anxiety:
dental, 142, 287n

242 / Influence
swimming, 142–143
Ardry, R., 290n
Arizona State University, 117, 200, 201
Armstrong, Thomas, 121–125, 127–128
Aronson, Elliot, 89–90, 178–179, 182–184
Asimov, Isaac, 197–198
association, see conditioning and association
Assurance des Succs Dramatiques, L’, 158
auctions, movie, 264–265
Australia, size-status study in, 222–223
authority, 208–236
clothes and, 226–229
connotation and, 220–229
health and, 219–220, 221, 224–226, 290n
Milgram study and, 208–215, 217, 218, 289n–290n
obedience to, 213–218, 224–226
reader’s report on, 235–236
reciprocity and, 234
saying no and, 230–235
titles and, 222–226
trappings of, 228–229
automobile accidents:
Chicago jury project and, 254–255
social proof and, 139–140, 144–147, 149–151, 162–163
suicide and, 144–147, 149–151
automobiles:
authority and, 229, 235–236
unfair exchanges and, 34
automobile sales:
advertising and, 191
authority and, 235–236
contrast principle and, 14
liking and, 170, 173, 174–175, 185, 205–206, 289n
lowball tactic and, 98–99, 284n
scarcity and, 268–270
similarity and, 173
autonomy, development of, 247
Bandura, Albert, 118

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 243
bank-examiner scheme, 227–228
bargaining, UCLA study of, 49–50
Bar-Ilan University, 40
Baron, Robert, 286n
bartenders, tipping of, 117
beatings, initiations and, 85, 86–87
beautification petitions, 73–74
beef, scarcity of, 255–256, 292n
beetles, rove, 282n
“bereavement” account of suicide-crash connection, 144–145
Berry, Dave, 161
“Bertha, the,” 123
Best Doctors in the U.S., The (Pekkanen), 203–204
betting, 57–58, 164–166, 283n
Bible, authority and, 217–218
Bickman, Leonard, 226–227
billboards, public-service, 72–74
blennies, saber-toothed, exploitative behavior of, 8–9, 282n
blood donation, rejection-then-retreat strategy and, 48, 283n
Bloomington, Ind., volunteers in, 68
bluethroats, trigger features and, 3, 281n
Bollen, Kenneth, 148
Bonner, Tom, 190
boyfriends:
commitment and consistency and, 58–59
Romeo and Juliet effect and, 247–250, 271, 291n–292n
Boy Scouts, reciprocal concessions and, 36–39
breast-examination study, 239, 291n
Brehm, Jack, 245, 291n
Brock, Timothy, 255
Bronner, Frederick, 87
Brown, Jerry, 27
buffalo hunting, 163–164
BUG device, 28–29
business suits, authority and, 227
bystander aid, bystanders, 129–140
apathy theory of, 131–132
conditions that cause decrease in, 136
devictimizing yourself and, 136–140

244 / Influence
in emergencies, 133–136, 138–139, 286n–287n
Genovese case and, 129–132
Latan-Darley view of, 132–133
pluralistic ignorance and, 129, 132–135, 139, 162, 286n–287n
single, 133–135
California, University of, at Los Angeles (UCLA), bargaining study at,
49–50, 283n
Calley, William, 290n
camp, contact and cooperation at, 179–182, 288n
Canada:
election study in, 171, 287n
rejection-then-retreat tactic in, 48
Carlos study, 183–184, 288n
Carter, Jimmy, 26
Castro, Fidel, 77
CBS Television, 266
celebrity endorsements, 192, 220
censorship:
scarcity and, 252–256
TV, 40–41
charity:
commitment and, 67–68
liking and, 169–170
self-image and, 77
social proof and, 117–118
uninvited gifts from, 33
Charlie’s Angels (TV show), 12
Chesterton, G. K., 237
Chevrolet sales, liking and, 170
Chicago, University of, Law School, 255–256, 292n
child rearing:
authority and, 216
personal responsibility and, 94–97
scarcity and, 261
children:
aggressive, 172
coin sizes and, 223, 290n
with dog phobia, 118

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 245
psychological reactance in, 246–247, 291n
social proof and, 118–119, 285n–286n
withdrawn, 119
Chinese prisoner-of-war (POW) camps, 70–71, 74–82
altered self-images and, 75–80
collaboration in, 70–71, 284n
political essay contests of, 78–79, 92–93
written statements in, 76–82
Christmas, toy purchases and, 64–66
Christmas cards, reciprocation and, 17
church collections, 117
Cialdini, Richard, 268–270
circumcision, 85
claquing, 158–159
clothing, clothing stores:
authority and, 226–229
contrast principle and, 13–14
“expensive = good” stereotype and, 10–11
similarity and, 173
trappings and, 228–229
Cohen, Michael, 219–220
coins, size vs. value of, 223, 290n
collectibles, scarcity and, 239, 240
college students:
authority influence and, 222–223, 229, 290n
censorship and, 252–253
contrast principle used by, 15–16
in Deutsch-Gerard commitment experiment, 82–83
in perceptions-of-size experiments, 222–223, 290n
rejection-then-retreat technique and, 39–40, 48
similarity and, 173
Colorado, study of couples in, 248, 292n
Columbia University, wallet study of, 140–142
Columbus, Ohio, voter turnout in, 68
commitment, 57–58, 67–103
altered self-images and, 73–75
effective, 69–71
foot-in-the-door technique and, 71–74
initiations and, 85–92

246 / Influence
inner choice and, 92–103
lowball tactic and, 98–103
public, 81–85
strategies for, 67–69
Tupperware party and, 167
written, 76–81, 85
Committee to Re-elect the President (CRP), 43
commodity theory, 255–256, 292n
competition, scarcity and, 262–266, 268–270
compliments, liking and, 174–176, 288n
computers, 276
con artists, 221, 226
concessions, reciprocal, 36–51
see also rejection-then-retreat technique
Concord (Calif.) Naval Weapons Station protest, 215–216, 217
conditioning and association:
advertising and, 191
food and, 193–194
good news vs. bad news and, 194–195
liking and, 188–204, 289n
mother’s role and, 190
politics and, 191–193
sports and, 195–203
weathermen and, 188–190
Congress, U.S., 25–26
consistency, 57–113, 283n–285n
automatic, 60–67, 103, 105–111
being right vs., 60
exploitation of, 64–67, 98–100
“Knowing what I now know” question and, 110–111
psychological view of, 59–60
reader’s report on, 111–113
saying no and, 103–111
stomach signal and, 105–109
thinking vs., 61–64
as valued and adaptive, 60, 82
see also commitment
Constitution, U.S., 256
Consumer Reports, 47, 283n

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 247
Consumers From Mars, 161
contact and cooperation, 176–187, 288n–289n
automobile sales and, 185, 289n
at camp, 179–182, 288n
crime and, 185–187
politics and, 176–177, 288n
race relations and, 177–185
contests:
political essay, 78–79, 92–93
testimonial, 80
contrast principle, 11–16
physical attractiveness and, 12, 282n
reciprocity rule and, 42–45
contributions, political, 26
cookie study, scarcity and, 256–257, 261–262, 267
cooperation:
between fish, 8–9
see also contact and cooperation
Cornell University, reciprocity experiment at, 20–21
correct behavior, social proof and, 116–119, 140, 155–156
Cou, Emile, 272
courtship behavior, 3, 8
Craig, Jim, 196
crime:
consistency and, 59–60
contact and cooperation and, 185–187
physical attractiveness and, 171–172, 287n–288n
see also murder
cults:
mass suicide and, 29–30, 152–156
social proof and, 119–128, 152–156, 286n
Dade County antiphosphate ordinance, 250–251
Darley, John, 132–133, 286n–287n
Darrow, Clarence, 167
Davies, James C., 257–259
Davis, Neil, 219–220
deadline tactic, 242–244
Dealin’ Dan, 205–206

248 / Influence
Dean, John, 44
death threats, initiations and, 86, 88
Democratic National Committee, break-in at, 42–45
dental anxiety study, 142, 287n
Deutsch, Morton, 82–83
Diller, Barry, 264–266
dime-request experiment, 173, 288n
Disabled American Veterans, 30
discotheques, social proof and, 118
discount coupons, 7–8
dog-phobia treatment, 118, 285n
door-to-door sales:
consistency and, 105–109
rejection-then-retreat technique and, 41–42
scarcity and, 244
written commitments and, 79
driver safety, public-service billboards and, 72–74
Drubeck, Harry, 10
Drubeck, Sid, 10–11
earache, “rectal,” 219–220
education, contact and cooperation and, 177–179, 182–185
Edwards, John, 91
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1., 29
Einstein, Albert, 1
elections:
candidate size and, 290n
familiarity and, 176–177, 288n
physical attractiveness and, 171, 287n
electric shock:
initiation and, 90, 284n
in Milgram study, 209–215
Eliot, Sonny, 190
emergencies, bystander aid in, 133–136, 138–139, 286n–287n
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 17, 103, 105, 107, 285n
endorsements, celebrity, 192, 220
energy conservation, 100–104, 284n
Ethiopia, Mexican relief aid from, 19
ethology, 2–3, 8–9

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 249
evangelical preachers, 117
“expensive = good” stereotype, 5–6, 10–11
exploitation:
of consistency, 64–67, 98–100
lowball tactic and, 98–100
of reciprocation, 31–36
of scarcity, 242–244
of weapons of influence, 8–11, 282n
exposure to cold, initiations and, 85–86, 87
Faintich, Barry, 240
Faraday, Michael, 60
fathers, association and, 203
favors, gifts, and aid:
asking for, 137–138, 139
physical attractiveness and, 172, 288n
reciprocation and, 17–30, 52–53, 282n
refusal of, 29–30, 52
unfair exchanges and, 33–36
unwanted, 30–33, 52
feelings, intellect vs., 110, 285n
Festinger, Leon, 59, 121–128, 286n
films:
auctions and, 264–265
social proof and, 118–119, 285n–286n
First Amendment, 252
fish:
competition and, 262–264
cooperating, 8–9
fixed-action patterns, 3–4
flawed items, scarcity and, 239, 240
Florida, study of bystander aid in, 135, 287n
food:
association and, 193–194
authority and, 290n
initiations and, 86, 87
foot-in-the-door technique, 71–74
Fox, M. W., 2
Fox, Robin, 18

250 / Influence
Fraser, Scott, 72–74
fraternal societies, initiation ceremonies of, 86–90, 92, 93
freedom:
autonomy and, 247
scarcity and, 245–251, 291n
Freeman, Jonathan, 72–74, 94–96, 284n
free samples, 27–29
Frenzer and Davis, 168
Fromkin, Howard, 255
fund-raising, food and, 193
Future Shock (Toffler), 275
gas prices, consistency and, 110–111
General Foods, 80
Genovese, Catherine, 129–132
Georgia, University of, 194–195
Gerard, Harold, 82–83
gifts, see favors, gifts, and aid
Girard, Joe, 170, 174–175
Goethe, Johann von, 145
Good Cop/Bad Cop, 186–187
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 259–260
Gouldner, Alvin, 18, 282n
Graham, Billy, 117, 285n
Green, Donna, 250
Greenwald, Anthony, 68
greeting cards:
liking and, 174–175
from strangers, 17, 282n
Gregory, Bob, 189
Griffin, Merv, 204
Grush, Joseph, 288n
Guardians, 121, 123
Gulban, Daniel, 242–243
gun law, psychological reactance and, 249, 250
Guyana, mass suicide in, 29–30, 152–156
halo effects, 171–172
Happy Days (TV show), 41

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 251
Hare Krishna Society, 22–24, 31–33
Harris, James, 77
Harvard University, 219
hazing, initiation ceremonies and, 85–93
health:
authority and, 219–220, 221, 224–226, 290n
scarcity and, 239
Health Care Financing Administration, U.S., 219, 225
Hell Week, 86–90, 92
help, see favors, gifts, and aid
Help Week, 88, 89
herd, cult as, 156
Hidden Persuaders, The (Packard), 27
Hieder, Fritz, 59
hiring, physical attractiveness and, 171
Hobbes, Thomas, 216
home-fire-safety inspections, 53–55
home-insulation study, 238, 291n
homicide, see murder
Howard, Daniel, 68–69
“How are you feeling” technique, 68, 69
hunting, of buffalo, 163–164
image, see self-image
inconsistency, as undesirable personality trait, 60, 82
indebtedness, feeling of:
uninvited favors and, 30–33
unpleasant character of, 34–35
influence, weapons of, 1–16, 281n–282n
exploitability of, 8–11, 282n
force lent to user by, 11–16
reader’s report and, 15–16
see also authority; commitment; consistency; liking; reciprocation;
scarcity; social proof
information, 273–277
psychological reactance and, 251–256
technology and, 275–276
initiations, 85–93
Aronson-Mills study of, 89–90

252 / Influence
of fraternal societies, 86–90, 92, 93
military, 90–92
tribal, 85–86, 90
insurance sales, similarity and, 174, 288n
intellect, feelings vs., 110, 285n
interpersonal relations:
foolish consistency and, 109–110
lowball tactic and, 100–104, 284n
reciprocity and, 29–30
see also boyfriends
Iowa energy research, 100–104, 284n
Israel, study of rejection-then-retreat technique in, 40, 283n
jewelry, weapons of influence in sale of, 1–2, 5–6, 10
Johnson, Lyndon B., 25–26
Jolls, Tom, 190
Jones, Edward, 77
Jones, Jim, 29–30, 152–156
Jonestown mass suicide, 29–30, 152–156
juries, jury trials:
censorship in, 253–255, 292n
hung, 83
Kalogris, Michael, 86–87
Keating, Charles H., Jr., 26
Keech, Marian, 121, 123–127
Kellerman, Sally, 27
Kelley, G. Warren, 47
Kennedy, John F., 287n
Kennesaw gun law, 249, 250
Kluckhohn, R., 85–86
Korean War, see Chinese prisoner-of-war (POW) camps
labor negotiations, rejection-then-retreat technique in, 40
Langer, Ellen, 4–5, 281n
Langford, David L., 189–190
Lansbury, Angela, 160–161
LaRue, Frederick, 43–45
Latan, Bibb, 132–133, 286n–287n

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 253
laughter, canned, 114–117, 158, 159, 285n
Laverne and Shirley (TV show), 41
Layden, Frank, 198
Leakey, Richard, 18
legal system:
physical attractiveness and, 171–172, 287n–288n
see also juries, jury trials
Leiden des jungen Werthers, Die (The Sorrows of Young Werther) (Goethe),
145
Liddy, G. Gordon, 43–45
Liebert, Robert, 286n
liking, 167–207, 287n–289n
automobile sales and, 170, 173, 174–175, 185, 205–206, 289n
compliments and, 174–176, 288n
conditioning, association and, 188–204, 289n
contact, cooperation and, 176–187, 288n–289n
Joe Girard formula and, 170
physical attractiveness and, 171–172, 287n–288n
reader’s report on, 206–207
saying no and, 204–206
similarity and, 173–174, 288n
Tupperware party and, 167–169
limited-number tactic, 239, 241–242
Lippmann, Walter, 114
loss, potential, as motivation, 238–239
lottery games, 284n
Louie, Diane, 29–30
love, interference and, 248–249, 291n–292n
lowball tactic, 98–104, 284n
energy conservation and, 100–104, 284n
luncheon technique, 193–194
Lussen, Frederick M., 130
lying, discouragement of, 96–97
McGovern, George, 43
MacKenzie, Bob, 265
Macrae, Norman, 276
Magruder, Jeb Stuart, 42–45
Marshall, Garry, 40–41

254 / Influence
Mauss, Marcel, 31
MCI Calling Circle, 207
Medication Errors (Cohen and Davis), 219–220
meditation, transcendental (TM), 61–64
merchandising, reciprocity and, 27–29
Mesa temple, 237–238
Mexico, Ethiopia’s aid to, 19
Mihaly, Orestes J., 243
Milgram, Stanley, 208–215, 217, 218, 282n–283n, 289n–290n
military, initiations and, 90–92
Mill, John Stuart, 274–275
Mills, Judson, 89–90
mimics, 8–9
minorities, see race relations
“mirroring and matching” evidence, similarity and, 174, 288n
mirror study, liking and, 176, 288n
Mitchell, John, 43–45
models, association and, 191
monkeys, authority and, 290n
Moriarty, Thomas, 59
Mormons, 237–238
Morrow, Lance, 260
mothers:
negative associations and, 190
stage, 203
Multiple Sclerosis Association, 77, 284n
murder:
bystander inaction and, 129–132, 286n–287n
similarity and, 151
Muskie, Edmund, 43
My Lai massacre, 290n
Nazi Germany, 289n
negligence-award study, 172, 288n
Newcomb, Theodore, 59
New Orleans Saints, 199
news, good vs. bad, 194–195
New York, studies of bystander aid in, 133–135, 287n
New York Times, 129–131

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 255
Nixon, Richard, 287n
Nixon administration, Watergate and, 42–45
no, saying:
authority and, 230–235
consistency and, 103–111
liking and, 204–206
reciprocation and, 51–55
scarcity and, 267–271
social proof and, 157–164
no-cost information offer, 53–55, 283n
North Carolina, experiment on compliments in, 176
North Carolina, University of, 253
nurses, authority and, 219–220, 224–226, 290n
obligation, reciprocation and, 17–19, 21, 31, 33–37, 53
O’Brien, Lawrence, 43, 45
O’Connor, Robert, 119
Ohio State University, 87
Olympics, association and, 191, 196, 201, 289n
opera, claquing and, 158–159
Packard, Vance, 27
Pallak, Michael, 100–103, 284n
participant observation method, social proof and, 119–128
parties, Tupperware, 167–169, 194
Pavlov, Ivan, 193–194
Pekkanen, John, 203–204
Pennsylvania, study of physical attractiveness of criminals in, 171–172,
288n
People’s Temple, Jonestown mass suicide and, 29–30, 152–156
perceptions of size, authority and, 222–224, 290n
perceptual contrast principle, 11–16, 282n
reciprocity rule and, 42–45
persuasion study, liking and, 172, 288n
pest-exterminator companies, 283n
petitions, signing of:
altered self-image and, 73–74
similarity and, 173, 288n
Philadelphia Phillies, 202

256 / Influence
Phillips, David, 145–149, 151–152
phobias, social proof and, 118
Photuris, 8, 282n
physical attractiveness:
association and, 191
contrast principle and, 12, 282n
liking and, 171–172, 191, 287n–288n
Pittsburgh, University of, 35, 283n
plastic surgery, rehabilitation vs., 287n–288n
pluralistic ignorance phenomenon:
bystander behavior and, 129, 132–135, 139, 162, 286n–287n
Jonestown mass suicide and, 155–156
politics:
association principle and, 191–193
censorship and, 252
familiarity and, 176–177, 288n
physical attractiveness and, 171, 287n
POW essay contests and, 78–79, 92–93
reciprocity and, 24–27
scarcity and, 257–261
Porcher (opera-house habitu), 158–159
Poseidon Adventure, The (movie), 264–266
praise, liking and, 174–176, 288n
prisoner-of-war camps, see Chinese prisoner-of-war (POW) camps
prize fights, homicide rates and, 151
Procter & Gamble, 80
psychological reactance:
censorship and, 251–255
in children, 246–247, 291n
Dade County antiphosphate ordinance and, 251–252
free choice and, 245–252
information restrictions and, 252–257
Kennesaw gun law and, 249, 251
Romeo and Juliet effect and, 247–250, 272, 291n–292n
scarcity and, 244–257
public-service billboards, 72–74
punishment:
child rearing and, 94–96
initiations and, 86, 87–88

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 257
in Milgram study, 208–211
Purdue University study, 253–254, 292n
Pyne, Joe, 273–274
race relations:
contact-cooperation approach to, 177–185
scarcity and, 259
racetracks, betting behavior at, 57–58, 164–166, 283n
raffle tickets, reciprocation and, 20–21, 31, 34
Razran, Gregory, 193–194
real estate, contrast principle and, 14
reasons, providing:
automatic compliance and, 4–5
child rearing and, 96–97
reciprocation, 17–56, 282n–283n
authority and, 234
concessions and, 36–51; see also rejection-then-retreat technique
exploitation of, 33–36
fund-raising dinners and, 193
obligation and, 17–19, 21, 31, 33–36, 53
power of, 21–30
prevention of repayment and, 35, 283n
reader’s report and, 55–56
saying no and, 51–56
Tupperware parties and, 167
unfair exchanges and, 33–36
uninvited debts and, 30–33
violation of, 19–20, 35
“rectal earache,” 219–220
Regan, Dennis, 20–21, 23, 31, 34
rehabilitation, plastic surgery vs., 287n–288n
rejection-then-retreat technique, 36–51, 283n
Israeli study of, 40, 283n
perceptual contrast rule and, 42–45
responsibility and, 50
satisfaction and, 50–51
victim reactions and, 47–48
religion:
authority and, 217

258 / Influence
social proof and, 119–128, 286n
responsibility:
bystander aid and, 132, 136, 138
commitment and, 92–97
rejection-then-retreat tactic and, 50
restaurants, tipping in, 232–235
revolution, scarcity and, 257, 259
Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 61
Riecken, Henry, 121–128, 286n
Robert, Cavett, 118
robins, trigger features and, 3, 281n
robot study, 94–96, 284n
Romeo and Juliet effect, 247–250, 271, 291n–292n
Rosenthal, A. M., 129–132
Rosten, Leo, 10
Russell, Dick, 40–41
Ryan, Leo J., 152
Sabin, Robert, 158
Sabini, John, 282n–283n
sales agreements, customer’s filling out of, 79–80
Sales Management, 47
sales operations and strategies:
commitment and, 71–72
commitment to goals as, 79
liking and, 167–169, 172–175, 185, 205–207, 289n
lowball tactic and, 98–99
rejection-then-retreat technique and, 41–42
scarcity and, 239–244, 255–256, 262, 263
social proof and, 118
see also automobile sales; door-to-door sales
Sananda, 121, 123
Sanka coffee ad, 220, 221
satisfaction, rejection-then-retreat tactic and, 50–51
Sauton (opera-house habitu), 158–159
scarcity, 237–271, 291n–292n
collectibles and, 239, 240
competition and, 262–266, 268–270
deadline tactic and, 242–244

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 259
experiencing vs. possessing and, 267–268
free choice and, 245–251, 291n
limited-number tactic and, 239, 241–242
optimal conditions and, 256–266
psychological reactance and, 244–256; see also psychological reactance
reader’s report on, 250, 271
sales and, 239–244, 255–256, 262, 263
saying no and, 266–270
shortcuts and, 244–245, 291n
violence and political turmoil and, 257–261
Schachter, Stanley, 121–128, 286n
Schein, Edgar, 70–71, 76, 284n
school desegregation:
liking and, 177–179, 182–185
scarcity and, 258
Segal, Henry, 75
Self, William, 264
self-image:
altering of, 73–75
association and, 201, 203
behavior and, 75–76
thoughts of others as factor in, 77
“Self-Reliance” (Emerson), 103, 105, 285n
sex, censorship and, 252–253
sexual obligation, 35–36, 283n
Shakespeare, William, 188, 253, 289n
Shaklee Corporation, 169
Sherif, Muzafer, 180–182, 288n
Sherman, Steven J., 67–68
similarity:
homicides and, 151
liking and, 173–174, 288n
social proof and, 140–156
suicide and, 144–156
wallet study and, 140–142, 149, 287n
size, perceptions of, authority and, 222–224
smoking:
psychological reactance and, 249
quitting, 84–85

260 / Influence
“social conditions” interpretation of suicide-crash connection, 144, 145
social proof, 114–166, 278–279, 285n–287n
advertising and, 117, 140, 159, 160–161
as automatic-pilot device, 157, 159–160, 163
automobile accidents and, 139–140, 144–147, 149–151, 162–163
bystander behavior and, see bystander aid, bystanders
canned laughter and, 114–117, 158, 159, 285n
claquing and, 158–159
correct behavior and, 116–119, 140, 155–156
cults and, 119–128, 152–156, 286n
falsified social evidence and, 158–162
influence of number of others and, 118, 285n
pluralistic ignorance and, 129, 132–135, 139, 155–156, 162, 286n–287n
reader’s report on, 164–166
religious movements and, 119–128
saying no and, 157–164
similarity and, 140–156; see also similarity
Tupperware parties and, 167–168
uncertainty and, 128–140, 153–154, 156
Sorrows of Young Werther, The (Die Leiden des jungen Werthers) (Goethe),
145
Southern California, University of (USC), 87, 88
Soviet Union, scarcity and, 259–260
sports, association and, 195–203
stage mothers, 203
standard solicitation approach, 69
status:
clothing and, 229
size and, 222–224, 290n
see also authority
stereotypes, 7, 9
“expensive = good,” 5–6, 10–11
Stevenson, McLean, 174
Storke, Bill, 264
Styron, William, 91
subway experiment, 283n
success, association and, 198–204
suicide:
auto and plane accidents and, 144–147, 149–151

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 261
Jonestown mass, 29–30, 152–156
similarity and, 144–156
Werther effect and, 145–147
Supreme Court, U.S., 258
surgery, plastic, 287n–288n
surprise, compliance and, 32, 282n–283n
Swanson, Richard, 87, 88
swimming anxiety, 142–143
technology, information and, 275–276
teenagers:
psychological reactance in, 247–250, 291n–292n
suicides of, 148
telephone solicitations:
charitable, 68–69
liking and, 206–207
television:
canned laughter on, 114–117, 285n
Nixon-Kennedy debates on, 287n
rejection-then-retreat technique and, 40–41
suicide and, 148
violence on, 285n–286n
“terrible twos,” 246–247, 291n
territorial defense, 3
thinking, consistency vs., 61–64
thirst, initiation and, 86, 87
Thonga, initiation ceremony of, 85–86, 90
Thorne, Avril, 200
threat, commitment and, 94–96
Tiananmen Square massacre, 93
Tiger, Lionel, 18
Time, 276
Tinker, Grant, 40–41
tips, increasing the size of, 117, 232–235
titles, 222–226
Toffler, Alvin, 275
Toronto, study of bystander aid in, 135, 287n
toy manufacturers, consistency and, 64–67
transcendental meditation (TM), consistency and, 61–64
trappings, of authority, 228–229

262 / Influence
tribal behavior:
buffalo hunting and, 163–164
initiations and, 85–86, 90
trigger features, 2–5, 7, 273, 281n
mimicking of, 8–9
Tupperware Home Parties Corporation, 168
Tupperware parties, 167–169, 194
turkey experiment, 2–3, 4, 116–117, 273, 281n
TV Guide, 40–41, 283n
uncertainty, social proof and, 128–140, 153–154, 156
uniforms, authority and, 226–227
urban environments, bystander aid discouraged by, 136
van Kampen, Jakob, 286n
“Vartan Bhanji,” 282n
Vinci, Leonardo da, 57
violence:
security and, 257–261
televised, 285n–286n
Virgil, 208
volunteer work:
commitment and, 67–68
rejection-then-retreat tactic and, 39–40, 48
voter turnout, 68
wallet study, 140–142, 149, 287n
Watergate break-in, 42–45
water temperature, contrast principle and, 12
weathermen, association and, 188–190
weight reduction, commitment to, 83–84
Werther effect, 145–147
West, Louis Jolyon, 153
Whitaker, Chuck, 190
Whitehead, Alfred North, 7
Whiting, J.W.M., 85–86
Willson, S. Brian, 215–216, 217
Wilson, Lee Alexis, 286n–287n
withdrawn children, social proof and, 119
women, reciprocation and, 35–36

Robert B. Cialdini Ph.D / 263
Wood, Robert, 265, 266
Worchel, Stephen, 256
World War I, 29
World War II, 70
Wriston, Walter, 275
written testaments:
publicizing of, 81–82
self-image and, 76–80
Xerox study, 4–5, 281n
Yale University, 211
Young, Robert, 220, 221, 230–231
Zappa, Frank, 272–273
Zweigenhaft, Richard, 290n

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
An array of people deserve and have my appreciation for their aid in
making this book possible. Several of my academic colleagues read and
provided perceptive comments on the entire manuscript in its initial
draft form, greatly strengthening the subsequent version. They are Gus
Levine, Doug Kenrick, Art Beaman, and Mark Zanna. In addition, the
first draft was read by a few family members and friends—Richard and
Gloria Cialdini, Bobette Gorden, and Ted Hall—who offered not only
much-needed emotional support but insightful substantive commentary
as well.
A second, larger group provided helpful suggestions for selected
chapters or groups of chapters: Todd Anderson, Sandy Braver, Catherine
Chambers, Judy Cialdini, Nancy Eisenberg, Larry Ettkin, Joanne Gersten,
Jeff Goldstein, Betsy Hans, Valerie Hans, Joe Hepworth, Holly Hunt,
Ann Inskeep, Barry Leshowitz, Darwyn Linder, Debbie Littler, John
Mowen, Igor Pavlov, Janis Posner, Trish Puryear, Marilyn Rall, John
Reich, Peter Reingen, Diane Ruble, Phyllis Sensenig, Roman Sherman,
and Henry Wellman.
Certain people were instrumental at the beginning stages. John Staley
was the first publishing professional to recognize the project’s potential.
Jim Sherman, Al Goethals, John Keating, and Dan Wegner provided
early, positive reviews that encouraged author and editors alike. William
Morrow and Company’s then president, Larry Hughes, sent a small
but enthusiastic note that fortified me importantly for the task that lay
ahead. Last and hardly least, Maria Guarnaschelli believed with me
from the start in the book I wanted to write. It is to her editorial credit
that the finished product remains that book, much improved. For her
insightful direction and her potent efforts in the book’s behalf, I am
most grateful.
In addition, I would be remiss if I did not recognize the skill and efficiency of Sally Carney at manuscript preparation and the sound counsel
of my attorney, Robert Brandes.
Finally, throughout the project, no one was more on my side than
Bobette Gorden, who lived every word with me.

About the Author
Robert B. Cialdini, Ph.D. holds dual appointments at Arizona State
Univercity. He is a W. P. Carey Distinguished Professor of Marketing
and Regents’ Professor of Psychology, and has been named Distinguished Graduate Research Professor. Dr. Cialdini is also president
of INFLUENCE AT WORK (www.influenceatwork.com), an international
training, speaking and consulting company based on his groundbreaking body of research on the ethical business applications of the
science of influence. 480-967-6070.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your
favorite HarperCollins author.

Copyright
Some images not available for electronic edition.
INFLUENCE. Copyright © 1984, 1994, 2007 by Robert Cialdini. All

rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted
the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text
of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored
in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system,
in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now
known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader March 2009
ISBN 978-0-06-189990-4
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com



======================================================================
FILE: Jeff Olson - The slight edge_ turning simple disciplines into massive success _2011_ .txt
======================================================================

®

“This fast-moving book teaches you one of the most powerful, practical and
important success principles ever discovered. It can change your life!”
—Brian Tracy, author of The Way to Wealth

Our favorite endorsements are from our readers!
“I have read personal development books for over 20 years, and I can say this is
the one that tied them all together. The book is so easy to read and understand and
so powerful in its simplicity.”
—Mike Bishop, Wilsonville, OR

The Slight Edge is a way of thinking, a way of processing
information that enables you to make the daily choices
that will lead you to the success you desire.

www.SUCCESS.com

www.SlightEdge.org

9 781935 944867

Jeff Olson

Jeff Olson has built several multimillion-dollar sales and
marketing organizations, hosted seminars in every major
city in the United States, and produced more than 900
television programs centered on personal development.
Over the past twenty years, Jeff has helped hundreds of
thousands of individuals
achieve better levels
ISBN 978-1-935944-86-7
of financial freedom
and personal
excellence.

The

Slight
Turning Simple Disciplines
Into Massive Success

Turning Simple Disciplines
Into Massive Success

“Success is achieved through inches of progress, not miles. Jeff Olson outlines the
philosophies that will give you The Slight Edge in life.”
—Darren Hardy, publisher of SUCCESS magazine and best-selling author of
The Compound Effect and Living Your Best Year Ever

Edge

“Success in life comes one day at a time and, as Jeff Olson suggests, one step at a
time. The Slight Edge will show you how your daily decisions can be the ultimate
key to your success.”
—Ken Blanchard, co-author of The One Minute Manager® and Lead with LUV

The Slight

“The Slight Edge makes you aware of the unwritten rules that we all live by and
just weren’t aware of. Jeff explains these principles in an easy-to-understand
manner that will have you re-evaluating those ‘insignificant’ decisions you make
every day.”
—John C. Maxwell, Founder of The John Maxwell Company and best-selling
author of The 21 Irrefutable Laws of Leadership

Jeff Olson
Revised Edition

Edge
®

The

Slight

Revised Edition

Praise from readers of The Slight Edge
As an instructor of a management course in a master’s program at NYU, I made The
Slight Edge required reading. It serves as the foundation for all other course content
because I believe the philosophy is key to understanding success.
—David G Rosenthal, Advisory Board Member, Member Curriculum Committee;
Adjunct Instructor; Chief Executive Officer, Shepard Communications Group, Inc.
The Slight Edge is the book that makes every other personal-development book
actually work. This is the REAL secret!
—Jesse Macpherson, Los Angeles, CA
The Slight Edge was the single most formative influence on my career, health and
happiness. I have gone back and read it over and over so many times that my copy
is in complete tatters.
—Reed Herreid, Minneapolis, MN
The Slight Edge freed me from the pressure I had put on myself for not maintaining
the progress I made. For instance, all the years spent trying to lose weight and
maintain. It was always a roller coaster, up and down, never any stability. But along
came The Slight Edge. This put everything in perspective. I can go after anything and
know that without a doubt I will be successful, because of The Slight Edge.
—Jimmy Williams, Austin, TX
A unique view on how small changes or actions done repeatedly can change your
personal, family and business life. An amazing and simple strategy anyone can
apply, if they are willing.
—Pierre Rattini, North Myrtle Beach, SC
I had read self-help books before and they did very little for me, so at first I didn’t
think this book would be much different. I was very wrong. This book has given me the
power of wanting to have some failure in my life, and made me see the point behind
the one penny. Before reading this book, I thought being average and unhealthy and
overweight was just the life I was meant to live. I was very wrong. This book moved me
in ways I never thought I could be. I wish I would have had it when I was 17.
—Tyra Snider, Canon City, CO
It has created a sense of calm and peace for us, knowing we are on this Slight Edge
journey to greatness. The Slight Edge has taught us the principle to be patient with
ourselves, to look toward improving 1 percent at a time. It has taught us that positive
and negative results don’t happen overnight, but are cultivated through simple daily
disciplines.
—Haas & Tahera Khaku, Anaheim Hills, CA, co-author, Power of Mentorship for
the 21st Century
The Slight Edge is the best personal-development book I have ever read.
—Michael Clouse, Seattle, WA
This book is a treasure and I use it in every aspect of my life—business, personal, and fun!
—Shenna Shotwell, Creedmoor, NC
The Slight Edge is a life philosophy that should be taught as soon as children take their
first steps. I wish someone had taught me this when I was young.
—Jane Lehman, Lexington, MI

I use this philosophy throughout my day. I’ve become a better person all around. I
was able to correct my negative outlooks. I’m a better role model for my children,
my health is getting better, I’m more connected spiritually, my relationships are
improving, and my business is thriving. It is a must-have and a must-read.
—Pedro Garcia, Middletown, NY
I, like many people, get frustrated when I do not see quick results. Through the
Slight Edge mentality, I was able to lose 25 pounds in just under three months. I also
convinced my father, 69, who lost 20 pounds in less than three months. My father
and I are both testimony to the fact that The Slight Edge works!
—Christopher Mangano, Boynton Beach, FL
I find the book to be one of the best “diet books” I have ever read, and I have read
quite a few of them through the last few years. So it is not willpower that is helping
me to lose weight, it is The Slight Edge. What an amazing revelation this has been!
—Carol Chandler, Denver, CO
Before I read The Slight Edge, I never understood why my efforts seemed to be a
degree off. The Slight Edge showed me how to get that last edge I needed!
—Lynda Cromar, Aurora, CO
The Slight Edge has had a profound effect on my life. After having it recommended
four different times from four different people in one month, I finally purchased it. It
was the first nonfiction book that I can remember not wanting to get to the end of
because I loved what I was learning!
—Laura Jo Richins, Mesa, AZ
I was born and raised in Albania. I came to America 13 years ago at age 18 by
myself, with nothing but a dream. I didn’t speak English, and had no money or
connections. I am a college dropout and a former pizza delivery driver. A friend
gave me The Slight Edge book and by implementing its simple principles, I am today
living the American Dream.
—Andi Duli, Oklahoma City, OK
The Slight Edge is truly a gift to the planet.
—Mark Skovron, Tampa Bay, FL
I was bankrupt, had my car repossessed, and was on Medicaid and applying for
food stamps. After putting the principles of The Slight Edge in place, I have made
over a million dollars and it has also helped me in every area of my life.
—Darin Kidd, Appomattox, VA
Reading The Slight Edge is perhaps one of the most eye-opening things one can
do. It’s such a simple concept that you realize you’ve overlooked every day of your
life. Easy to do, easy not to do. Suddenly it’s shocking how many things you really
haven’t been doing. The examples Jeff Olson provides are easy to understand and
truly show how The Slight Edge affects the world.
—Julie Jonak, Houston, TX
I have read numerous personal-development books through the years, and by
far, this is one of the best! By applying the principles of The Slight Edge, I’ve lost 35
pounds in just three months, and am still going strong. I’m also working them into my
job, part-time pursuits and every area of my life. I have quit focusing as much on the
goals, and am focusing more on the little things I do every day, since I can control
those. As a result, my life is going SO much better than it ever has!
—Richard Green, Franklin, TN

This is a very simple, easy-to-follow book that can lead anyone from where they are
to whatever level of success they want to achieve.
—Alex Serrano, Las Vegas, NV
Over the course of the last year, by putting the Slight Edge concepts in practice, I
have stopped using tobacco, and lost 25 pounds through diet and exercise.
—Bob Sutton, Ft. Collins, CO
Following the principles outlined in Jeff Olson’s The Slight Edge has helped me
become a millionaire—several times over. Thanks for refining the processes into an
understandable and workable format, Jeff.
—Rex LeGalley, Albuquerque, NM
The Slight Edge principles apply to everything…. My wife and I have used it to
improve our health and now we have lost over 100 pounds combined!
—BJ Baker, West Manchester, OH
I led a life of errors in judgment until I came across this magnificent book. A blueprint
for life can be founded on the Slight Edge philosophy. I found myself discarding old
bad habits and replacing them with new positive habits; the result is a successful
life. I was very reckless in my daily decisions, as well as my family positioning. My son
noticed a huge change in my character and life perception. I no longer spend
money haphazardly and my priorities are up to par.
—Simon Ponce, Irvine, CA
As a student of personal progress for the past 40 years, I consider this work to be one
of the foundational keys to the application of literally every other resource in this
incredibly important area of life.
—Stephen McBroom, Floyd, VA
The Slight Edge gives you that extra kick to push you beyond your wish list and into
achieving your highest potential. I am able to apply the tools from The Slight Edge to
balance my full-time work, while completing my bachelor’s degree.
—Mark Roberts, Redmond, WA
The Slight Edge is a phenomenal book. It makes you aware of the unwritten rules
that we all live by and just weren’t aware of! A definite MUST READ for EVERYONE,
from student to executive. Wondering why you can’t pass a class? The Slight Edge!
Tried those diets but just can’t seem to lose the weight? The Slight Edge! Have a
savings plan but your bank account just refuses to grow? The Slight Edge! When
applied correctly, The Slight Edge will show you how to get things back on track
in your life. You will now be aware of what you’re doing and be armed with the
knowledge to correct the important things in your life, from relationships to getting
that executive promotion. The principles have definitely helped my life. Here’s to
your success!
—Leonard Taylor, Las Vegas, NV
Before reading The Slight Edge, my mindset for my life was not where it needed to
be. I was a broke college student conforming to the masses. This book has changed
the direction of my life dramatically by mentoring me on a new path filled with
positive and disciplined philosophy.
—Tim Walter, San Diego, CA
After applying the Slight Edge, my life began to change for the better and I found
myself harnessing the powers of completion and momentum every day. It was
amazing to see results in my business, in my health, and in my personal life.
—Carl Coffin, Goose Creek, SC

I was searching for many answers to my life, when all of a sudden, I came across this
magnificent and truthful information. It expanded my vision and took the fog away
from my eyes.
—Michael Huerta, San Jacinto, CA
As a successful leadership coach, I recommend two books to all of my clients. The
Slight Edge is one of them!
—Dennis Antoine, Coral Springs, FL
The Slight Edge kept me going on those days when I felt like I was not making progress
by reassuring me that taking even the smallest positive action would eventually pay off.
—Susan Mix, Santa Clara, CA
What an incredible masterpiece! The Slight Edge challenges me daily in business and
in life. An absolute “must read” and “must apply” in every area.
—Dr. Vanessa R. Booker, Glendale, AZ
The Slight Edge principles are so powerfully uplifting and inspirational that they are
a catalyst for action. The Slight Edge gives me the momentum to achieve my daily
goals in life.
—Antoinette Mims, New York, NY
I have read personal-development books for over 20 years, and I can say this is the
one that tied them all together, because it is so easy to read and understand, and
so powerful in its simplicity.
—Mike Bishop, Wilsonville, OR
The Slight Edge has been a philosophical staple in my life, and in the lives of those
I mentor. I have started a business, and have gotten in better physical shape. The
most memorable anecdote I use is, “What you do matters. What you do today
matters. What do you every day matters.”
—David Mack, Sacramento, CA
I LOVE THIS BOOK! As a former professional athlete, coach for over 25 years and
wellness consultant, I strongly recommend The Slight Edge to everyone. If you want
success in your health, finances and relationships, embrace this book and create a
new mindset, thereby a new future for yourself. The Slight Edge is empowering! The
philosophies and thoughts will hit home with everyone who reads it.
—Lucy Del Sarto, Olathe, KS
The Slight Edge is serving as a timeless way for me to help share the principles in
which one must live to succeed in life. I have literally shared the concepts in this
book with thousands.
—Ryan Chamberlin, Belleview, FL
As a full-time police office I believe The Slight Edge mentality should be a part of the
educational system across America.
—Bobby Garcia, Tucson, AZ
This book has given me the vision to look past my current circumstances and into my
desired results!
—Steven Joseph, St. Louis, MO

The Slight Edge took years of personal-development study and rolled it all into one,
easy to understand book. Jeff Olson did an awesome job of communicating how
anyone in any profession can improve his/her productivity, personal relationships
and family life. WOW!
—Brian Kennedy, Jacksonville, NC
I would recommend The Slight Edge to anyone who is looking to understand why
they have not been able to achieve their goals. They will understand that it is not
all the fancy words many of the television hosts talk about, but the small things Mr.
Olson writes about in his book—things that make absolute sense and are easy to do.
I enjoy this book and have plans to make it part of my daily routine. I plan to give my
family and myself a slight edge lifestyle. Thanks Mr. Olson.
—Glenn Watkins, Cibolo, TX
I use the Slight Edge philosophy every day in my personal life and especially in my
business. Doing the daily activities compounded over time has led me to the kind
of success most people only dream about. As a single mother of three boys, it is the
principles in this book that have made me over a million dollars in just a few short
years, and have allowed me to achieve levels of success in business and in life. The
Slight Edge will help anyone.
—Christa Aufdemberg, Orange County, CA
The Slight Edge has given me and my family the secrets to a successful and
abundant life. Practicing the basic philosophies of mastering the mundane has
given my entire world a complete paradigm shift. There’s a one-degree difference
between hot and boiling, and this book has given me the necessary degrees to go
from Good 2 Great. The Slight Edge is a lifer in my arsenal of personal development.
—Ken Hills, Syracuse, NY
I found The Slight Edge to be a remarkable book. It was refreshingly different than
other self-help books, as it focused on the hundreds of little daily and weekly
decisions that build up to deliver the big hairy goals that one wants in life. My
problem was that I can dream big and expect a lot from myself. But saying I wanted
something huge next month and failing month after month just led to reluctance
overall. Instead, after reading The Slight Edge, it was easier for me to focus on the
daily schedule and on making daily progress.
—Timothy Sharpe, Redmond, WA
I have used the principles of The Slight Edge to improve my physical fitness. I have
used it to help pay off debt, build my savings and investments, and improve my
relationships with my children.
—Stan Snow, North Yarmouth, ME
I came across The Slight Edge and it instantly captured my attention. As an actress
living in New York, it is so easy to get overwhelmed by everything that comes with
this competitive business. The Slight Edge helped me to understand that the small
choices I make every moment of every day make a huge impact on my life.
Living in a society with so much emphasis on success, I found that The Slight Edge
redefined what success is for me. It helps me to take the next step forward in my
everyday life and do the next right thing. This ultimately leads to a very successful
and fulfilling life. I attribute much of my success to the simple principles this book
has outlined.
—Cara Cooley, Spokane, WA

Edge
®

The

Slight
Turning Simple Disciplines
Into Massive Success

Jeff Olson

Revised Edition

The material you have purchased is protected by U.S. and international copyright conventions.
You are authorized to download a personal copy of this e-book and you may maintain one personal
backup copy of the e-book, so long as such backup is not used while the primary copy exists. Copying
and distributing copyrighted electronic files is a violation of U.S. and international copyright laws. If
you did not purchase this e-book, please send an e-mail to contact@SUCCESS.com with details on
where you obtained this copy.
This publication is designed to provide general information regarding the subject matter covered.
However, laws and practices often vary from state to state and are subject to change. Because each
factual situation is different, specific advice should be tailored to the particular circumstances. For this
reason, the reader is advised to consult with his or her own advisor regarding their specific situation.
The author and publisher have taken reasonable precautions in the preparation of this book and
believe the facts presented in the book are accurate as of the date it was written. However, neither
the author nor the publisher assumes any responsibility for any errors or omissions. The author and
publisher specifically disclaim any liability resulting from the use or application of the information
contained in this book, and the information is not intended to serve as legal, financial or other
professional advice related to individual situations.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and retrieval systems, without the
written permission from the publisher.
The Slight Edge® Copyright © 2005, 2011 by Jeff Olson. All rights reserved.
Published by SUCCESS Books™, an imprint of SUCCESS Media.

200 Swisher Road
Lake Dallas, Texas 75065
U.S.A.
Toll-free: 800.752.2030
Tel: 940.497.9700
The Slight Edge® is a registered trademark of The Meyer Resource Group, Inc. and is used under an
exclusive license.
SUCCESS is a registered trademark and SUCCESS magazine and SUCCESS Books are trademarks
of R&L Publishing, Ltd.
VideoPlus is a registered trademark of VideoPlus, L.P.
To order additional copies, visit www.SUCCESS.com.
Printed in the United States of America.
Book design by Amy McMurry
Library of Congress Control Number: 2005902199
PDF eBook ISBN: 978-1-935944-60-7
SPECIAL SALES
SUCCESS Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase for sales promotions and
premiums. Special editions, including personalized covers, excerpts of existing books, and corporate
imprints, can be created in large quantities for special needs. For more information, contact Special
Markets, SUCCESS Books, sales@success.com.

Contents

Introduction: The Missing Ingredient..................................................................................1
Foreword: The Road to the Slight Edge.............................................................................9
Three Stories. ......................................................................................................................15
Part One: The Slight Edge
Chapter 1

The Slight Edge Philosophy. ..................................................................25

Chapter 2

The Secret of Easy Things. .....................................................................33

Chapter 3

Is Time on Your Side?. ............................................................................45

Chapter 4

You Have to Start With a Penny. ..........................................................57

Chapter 5

How to Avoid the Myth of Quantum Leaps........................................65

Chapter 6

The 7 Slight Edge Principles...................................................................75

Chapter 7

Two Life Paths.........................................................................................95

Part Two: Mastering Your Life
Chapter 8

Mastering the Slight Edge..................................................................115

Chapter 9

Faces of the Slight Edge. ...................................................................127

Chapter 10 Invest in Yourself...................................................................................139
Chapter 11 Turning Your Dreams into Reality........................................................157
Chapter 12 Living the Slight Edge..........................................................................169
Chapter 13 Where to Go from Here......................................................................185
Afterword: The Slight Edge Next Generation by Amber Olson. .................................189
A Special Invitation. ........................................................................................................199
Life-Transforming Resources...........................................................................................201
About the Author. ............................................................................................................203

Acknowledgments

My thanks go to my mother, who has always believed in me; to Renée, my
wife of eighteen years and now friend for life, who has always stood by me; and to
our precious daughter Amber, who is our proudest accomplishment. They have
all been my own personal Slight Edge.
A special thanks to Jim Rohn, whose teachings have had a profound impact
on me. It’s often his wisdom you hear in these words.
To John David Mann, my co-author, who brought his craft, passion, literary
magic and good cheer to the project and made our book shine. To John Milton
Fogg for his insights and his support, and for helping to get the ball rolling.
To Todd Eliason and Reed Bilbray who brought their brilliance to this revised
edition. To my close friend Stuart Johnson for helping this book, a dream of mine
for many years, to finally come to pass.
To Amber Olson who has been the driving force in bringing to light this
revised edition. It would not have happened without her passion and Slight Edge
persistence. She continues to make me proud by living the Slight Edge in every
area of her life.
And to all who know they have greatness deep inside them—and that it’s
just a Slight Edge away.
A special thanks to those already living the Slight Edge philosophy, many of
whose stories you will read in this book. They are the inspiration for this revised
edition and are living proof of the power of the Slight Edge.

Introduction:
The Missing Ingredient

The Shoeshine Woman
I arrived at the Phoenix airport about 6:30 in the morning. Having time
before my plane left, I looked around to see if there was a place where I could
get my shoes shined. There was hardly anybody in the airport at that time of the
morning. I strolled around.
Before long, I found a shoeshine stand. It was open; a woman in her mid to
late forties sat in one of the customer chairs, absorbed in a paperback book. She
was dressed in black stretch pants, a black apron and a white shirt. She seemed
like a nice, solid person.
I walked over to her stand.
The woman greeted me warmly. She was friendly and happy—not always an
easy way to be before the sun comes up, I thought. She got up, set down her book,
first carefully folding over the corner of the page she’d been reading, then took up
the tools of her trade and pleasantly ushered me into the chair.
Her stand was located right next to a service door through which a constant
stream of maintenance men and janitors came and went. Got to be at work by
seven, I guessed. As they passed by our shoeshine stand, every one of these men
stopped and exchanged greetings with the woman. She knew them all by name
and they knew hers, too. It was clear they were all friends.
She went to work on my shoes, and we started talking.
Her daughter, she told me, had just won a cheerleading contest. Boy was she
proud of her! The girl was hoping to go to a cheerleading camp in Dallas. “Tell
you the truth,” she confided, her voice dropping a bit, “I don’t know how in the

2

The Slight Edge
world I’m going to find the money to buy her the uniform and plane ticket, let
alone the camp tuition.”
In just the few minutes that I sat with this woman, I learned a good deal
about her life—and about her. She loved her family, and for that matter, liked
people in general. She made friends easily and was a natural-born communicator.
It was also clear that she enjoyed her work.
And it’s a good thing she does, I thought—because she’d been there, shining
shoes in that same spot, for more than five years.
I couldn’t help but wonder what this woman’s life would be like if she had
taken a different path five years earlier. She was well spoken, carried herself well,
and was friendly and affable.
With different clothes and a little attention to her hair, she could easily pass for
a successful businessperson.
I noticed the book she’d been reading. It was a popular novel, something
to pass the time, to survive the stretches of occupational boredom by living
vicariously in someone else’s imagined romance. There was a little heap of them
sitting dog-eared by the wall.
What if, instead of spending ten or fifteen minutes here and there, tucked in
between customers, sinking into the pages of those forgettable novels, she had spent
the last five years reading books that were genuinely life changing? What if that little
stack of books included Napoleon Hill’s Think and Grow Rich, Stephen Covey’s
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, or David Bach’s Smart Women Finish
Rich? Where would she be today?
The shoeshine woman was a hard worker. Good with people. She knew
how to read and clearly enjoyed doing so. She was a superb communicator. She
obviously had the talent, personality and basic life skills to accomplish a lot more
than just living off tips from shining the shoes of people who could afford to buy
their kids new uniforms and tickets to Dallas.
But she was spending her life building other people’s dreams—not her own.
Your income tends to equal the average income of your five best friends, I mused.
What if she had spent time around people with significantly higher incomes than her
own? What if, instead of hanging out only with her colleagues here in the airport,
she had cultivated a different group of friends? What if she’d been associating with
powerful people, successful people, mentors, movers, shakers, leaders? She could easily
have done this—she’s a terrific conversationalist. If she had, where would she be today?
I’m not making a value judgment on modest incomes or simple occupations.
There are people who work the humblest of jobs yet live lives rich in relationships
and joy, just as there are extremely wealthy people who are also extremely

Introduction 3
unhappy. And I’m not criticizing popular novels. But it was clear that this
woman was struggling, and as we sat there talking, I’d have bet anything that she
wanted more out of life.
It was clear that she wanted to give her daughter the uniform and the Dallas
trip, things she couldn’t afford in the life she was living. And it was clear that
it was so much on her mind, she’d confided her worries to a complete stranger
within five minutes of meeting him.
She wanted more, it was plain to see. Why didn’t she have it?
She’s industrious, motivated and smart. She reads. She listens. She’s sharp.
Where would she be today if she’d set foot on a different path a year ago? Five years
ago? You can bet she wouldn’t be shining my shoes. Managing a chain of shoeshine
stands is more like it. Would she be having any trouble sending her daughter to
Dallas? I bet she’d be sponsoring the entire team—and going with them, too!
While this woman with the wonderful personality continued shining my
shoes, I was watching her in my mind’s eye, seeing her on a plane to Texas
surrounded by giggling, excited, happy teenagers, seeing her being successful in
so many different ways, in so many areas, making such a difference in her own
life and the lives of so many others, if only ... what? What was missing?
Feelings welled up in me, a mix of frustration and sadness. I felt for a
moment as if I were going to cry, and I wondered, Why are you so moved by all
of this? You’ve seen this before a hundred times—why are you so affected by this
one instance?
One reason, I knew, was that it reminded me of another character I’d
observed before—nice, like the shoeshine woman, a good person ... just not
succeeding in life.

The Beach Bum
I was born and raised in Albuquerque, New Mexico. My dad died when I
was eleven; I remember being handed the flag from his casket. My mom held
everything together; she was a great, loving mom. But it was still a rough way
to grow up: a fatherless, blond-headed kid in a Hispanic neighborhood, who
didn’t fit in. I really didn’t know what to do with it all, so I turned my energy into
mischief and misbehavior: I blamed everything and everyone.
In third grade, my teachers informed my mom that I had a low IQ. I quickly
gained a reputation for mischief and troublemaking. While my mom worked her
way through the years, I struggled my way through school. By age eighteen, it
was clear to anyone who knew me that I didn’t have much of a future.

4

The Slight Edge
I begged my way into the University of New Mexico. At college, I built
on my previous academic career and succeeded in taking my C average to a D
average. I did learn one thing, though: I learned that when spring break came,
all the students went to Daytona Beach for a week. I thought I could do one
better—I quit school and moved there.
At Daytona Beach, I pursued my first profession: I became a beach bum. I
lifted weights and chased girls. I let my hair grow long and curly. People started
calling me “Gorgeous George,” after the famous wrestler at the time.
I got a job at the Orlando Country Club cutting the grass on the golf course.
One day, as I was cutting the greens in the hot Florida sun, I paused to watch the
wealthy club members playing golf on the grass I had cut. As I watched them
hum to and fro in their zippy golf carts, in dapper fine golf outfits, with their
classy golf bags filled with expensive golf clubs, I felt a burning question simmer
up inside.
Why is it that they’re over there riding in carts, and I’m over here working?
I don’t get it. Why are they putting and I’m cutting? I don’t get it! I’m as good as
these people are. How do they get to have it ten times better than me? Are they ten
times better than me? Are they ten times smarter? Or do they work ten times harder?
For whatever reason, as happens in so many people’s lives, I found
myself staring squarely at a fork in the road, a point I now refer to as a “day of
disgust,” that moment of impact we sometimes hit in our lives when we face our
circumstances and make a decision to change.
In that instant, standing there sweating in the Florida heat, I came to a
moment of decision. I suddenly knew that I’d had it up to here with where I was,
what I was and who I was. Something clicked; the tumblers in the lock fell into
place; and I knew that I could never go back to who I’d been only a minute earlier.
I knew that for things to change, I had to change. For things to get better, I had
to get better.
I left the golf course.
I loaded my stereo and clothes into my 1964 Dodge Dart slant-six (all my
possessions fit easily into the back seat with room for a passenger) and took off
for Albuquerque. It took me six days just to get to Texas because the car kept
overheating. It was the longest trip of my life.

The Superachiever
That semester, for the first time in my life, I got straight A’s. I went on to
business school and graduated at the very top of my class. Fresh out of college, I

Introduction 5
became one of the youngest international airport managers in the country. I was
then recruited by Texas Instruments (TI). I wanted to be in management, but they
said, “If you want to be in management, you have to start in sales.” Sales! I hated
the idea of sales, knew nothing about it and was terrified of it, but sales it was.
I worked at TI for five years and went on to become Intelligent Systems
Manager. But corporate America wasn’t for me. There was a lot of politics
(which I hated) and it did not feel like I’d yet found the place where I belonged.
I then decided to start a solar energy company. I knew nothing about solar
energy; I barely knew whether the sun came up in the east or in the west. But with
four hundred solar companies in the state, New Mexico was the capital of the
budding new industry, so ignorance or not, the smart course of action seemed clear.
And at first, it looked like I had indeed made the smart decision. Within two
years, my company was in the top 20, and eventually we became the fifth-largest
solar-air energy company in America. I was thrilled. I was on top of the world.
What I did not yet know was that nothing ever stays the same: everything is in
motion. Everything changes.
Times changed. Tax laws changed. Our industry was hit hard. Before I knew
what was happening, I had lost everything, gone back to zero and below—owing
more money than I thought I could ever even hope to make again.

The Lesson
The night my car was towed away, I sat in despair and thought:
This just isn’t fair. After living as a failure all my life, I woke up one day and
came to my senses, went back to college, applied myself like crazy, entered at the
bottom and graduated at the top, worked for a major corporation for five years and
went to the very top, built my own company in less than five years and went to the top
... and here I am, after twelve long years of building toward success, at the bottom
again! I’m more broke today than when I was Gorgeous George on the beach!
Twelve years of blood and guts, and I was more of a failure than ever. I
couldn’t wrap my head around it. I couldn’t see the logic, the justice, the reasons
for any of it. Was life just inherently unfair? Was that it? Was there simply no
rhyme or reason for anything? Was there no point in even trying?
That was when I began to examine more carefully what had happened in
my life.
I had been a college dropout, a beach bum and a complete financial
failure. And I had also been a straight-A student, a top corporate manager, a
superachieving entrepreneur in a cutting-edge industry and a complete financial

6

The Slight Edge
success. And all of those had been the same person. So what was the difference?
It made no sense.
Or did it?
For the first time, I began to see that over the years of my roller-coaster
career, I had gone through a rich sequence of experiences that held the secrets
to success as well as to failure. I had proven to myself, beyond any shadow of
doubt, the depths of failure that simple daily errors in judgment could produce. I
had also seen what simple daily disciplines could accomplish. I just hadn’t quite
realized what I knew.
It was time to pull away the veil of circumstance and look right at the heart
of the matter. To go behind the results and examine the actions, and behind the
actions to find the attitudes, and behind the attitudes to discover the thinking
that held them there.
That was when I began to discover and explore the Slight Edge.
Since that time, I have built some extraordinary businesses and earned more
money than I ever dreamed of back when I was a corporate manager or solar
energy entrepreneur. I’ve also experienced more joy and fulfillment within my
family and other relationships than I knew was possible. I’ve also discovered new
vistas in my own investment in my own development, in terms of both health
and learning.
Perhaps most important of all is that I’ve built a philosophy that is grounded
in reality, in the way things actually work—not on luck but on the power of the
simple disciplines.
I could lose it all tomorrow. (It’s happened before; I’d survive.) But there is
something I cannot lose, and with that one thing I could start from scratch and
build it all back up again. That one thing is the Slight Edge.

If Only …
“You’re lookin’ good, sir, lookin’ good.”
The shoeshine woman was grinning at me. Another customer lost in his
early morning thoughts. And another job well done. I looked down: I could see my
reflection in my shoes.
Indeed I am. Lookin’ good … thank you. Thanks very much.
I paid her, gave her as big a tip as I could without (I hoped) having her feel
I was being patronizing, and walked away with clean shoes and a heavy heart.
She was right; for me, things were lookin’ good, sir, lookin’ good.
But why the beach bum and not the shoeshine woman?

Introduction 7
While my shoes had been getting a shine, the airport had grown busier. I
now walked through a growing throng of travelers as I worked my way toward
my gate. I noticed all the faces filing past me. Hardly anyone was smiling. Most
of my fellow travelers were trudging with their heads bowed down. I saw bored
expressions. Vacant. Porch light’s on, dog’s barking, but nobody’s home.
Everybody looked so tired. Failing is exhausting.
I heard angry words.
I stopped for a cup of coffee and heard a young couple arguing with each
other. A burly man scolded his young son to the point of tears. A heavy woman
complained about the service, then the prices, then her food, and then started
back in on the service again. The other people in line nodded their heads. A few
joined her in a chorus of negativity.
Why is everyone so … down? Everything these people need to know to change
their lives for the better is already available. All the information they could possibly
need to put them on a path of extraordinary success and fulfillment is out there, in
books and CDs, DVDs and workshops. There are people to help them—rich, living
resources to guide them, be their mentors, teachers, coaches and allies.
I knew that the difference between who they were and who they could be
wasn’t based on any lack of good information. It was all already available.
But why, if the information is all there, all the resources are there, and these
people really do want to succeed, aren’t they doing it?
I looked around the airport as the early morning rush hour swelled its ranks
of busy, hurrying, scowling, unhappy people shambling past with no spark in
their faces, no bounce in their step. I wished I could somehow address them all,
that I could touch all their lives with my silent soliloquy.
The problem, I shouted out in my head, is that you don’t have a way to process
the information. There’s no framework in place for you to take in all the extraordinary
insight that’s out there and put it to work in your life.
If only you were aware of the Slight Edge. If only you knew what it was doing
in your life and how easy it is to have the Slight Edge working for you—instead of
against you.
If only you were making the right choices, doing those simple, little disciplines that
would change your life for the better forever … where would you be five years from today?
If only you learned to recognize the Slight Edge ...
If only ...
But it was only in my head. Not a soul heard my words … nobody, that is,
but me.

That day, on the plane, I started writing this book.
The Slight Edge is not just more good information. It’s not another self-help
success book packed with some revolutionary “new best way” of doing things. You
don’t need that. Nobody needs that. All the “new and better” information is already
available and has been for years.
This book is a precursor to help you use that information.
This book is what I hope will help you take whatever information you want,
whatever how-to’s or strategies or goals or aspirations, and turn them into the life
you want. This book is what I wish I could have put into that sweet and sad shoeshine
woman’s hands.
I have since been back to that airport. In fact, I have been back through there
many, many times. I have looked for the shoeshine woman, but she is no longer there.
I don’t know where she is or what has happened in her life. But I do know this: she is
not alone. There are millions upon millions of people, everywhere I go, everywhere I
look, whose lives are not all that they wish, not all that they yearn for. Not even close.
And yet they could be.
So I dedicate this book to that shoeshine woman, to her daughter, to her daughter’s
cheerleading team ... and to everyone else in the world who wants more.
I dedicate this book to you and to those who have already put the Slight Edge
into practice.

Foreword:
The Road to the Slight Edge

It’s been some time now since my encounter with the shoeshine lady, and a
lot has happened since then. I have been fortunate to be the CEO and owner of
many successful companies. So how did I get there? Well, I’ve had some help.
When you get the opportunity to be around successful CEOs and influential
authors and speakers, their wisdom has a way of rubbing off on you.
But the main reason for my success—and the success of other influential
people around the world—continues to be the daily application of the philosophy
I am going to share with you called the Slight Edge.
After my time at Texas Instruments and building my own company Sun
Aire of America, which at the time was one of the largest solar energy companies
in the country, I went on to build three separate multimillion-dollar sales forces,
one of which I was appointed CEO.
Based on that experience, I founded TPN (The People’s Network), which
was one of the largest personal-development training companies in the nation,
producing over 900 television programs on various topics such as family
relationships and finance, etc. As the CEO of TPN I was often regarded as one
of the most influential people in personal development. I eventually sold TPN to
a New York Stock Exchange company.
I then took the principles I learned at TPN to help consult for a company,
and I have been instrumental in taking them from $70 million in revenues to
$500 million.
I arrived at these destinations, not by being smarter than everyone else,
not by quantum leaps of advancement, but by consistently applying the Slight
Edge philosophy.

10

The Slight Edge

The Pinnacle of Personal Development
As CEO and founder of TPN I had the opportunity to meet with many of the
greatest masterminds and thinkers of our time. Influential authors and speakers
were lining up at my door, due to the large distribution of personal-development
information our company produced. I sat with Oprah Winfrey for lengthy
in-depth discussions on the path of personal development. I spent a weekend
with Dick Snyder, then CEO of Simon & Schuster (the largest publisher of
personal development), in his mansion in the woods of Connecticut, discussing
everything there is to discuss about personal development. I worked closely with
Jan Miller, the biggest literary agent of personal development. I even went to
Nashville, the capital of country music, to talk with legendary country music
executive Jimmy Bowen about mixing personal development with music.
I met with about every leading author and speaker on every topic you can
imagine, many of whom made appearances in many of our programs. TPN was
making huge waves. I was on the cover of The Wall Street Journal as well as many
other publications, including Entrepreneur magazine and SUCCESS magazine,
discussing what TPN was accomplishing in the personal-development world.
Does Chicken Soup for the Soul sound familiar? It should; this one book has sold
over 100 million copies and has spawned several other titles that have been translated
into several languages. I was there in 1993 when author Mark Victor Hansen shared
with me his idea and dream to create the Chicken Soup for the Soul series.
I don’t bring up these examples just to brag or to drop names; I do it to explain
what all these experiences have afforded me: a rare opportunity to absorb and amass
information from the very best on every topic imaginable, and see it all from the
catbird seat. We were not just information providers but information producers.
What I came to realize is that information about how to become successful has
always been readily available, but if the person absorbing that information doesn’t
have the right philosophy to apply it the right way, success will elude their grasp.
You see, there is no magic bullet, quick fix, or quantum leap method to reach
success. Marketing tactics are used to pull us in to “lose 30 pounds in 3 weeks” or
“make money while you sleep.” The only problem? Although some might have
success in the beginning, the results are not long lasting, This ends up frustrating
the consumer and makes them give up on otherwise great information, that if
applied with the right philosophy would have given them great results.
What the Slight Edge philosophy is meant to do is give you a philosophy
that will become a filter for every decision you make. It will give you a way to
apply great information into your life in a way that will produce lasting results. It

Foreword
is the missing ingredient to making change happen! If you understand the Slight
Edge philosophy then you can effectively apply any sound principle or action
into your life with success. And that is a 100 percent guarantee. In fact, if after
putting the principles to work in your own life you don’t see improvement, we
will refund every penny you paid for this book.
I have been teaching the Slight Edge philosophy for many years now,
and published the first edition of the book in 2005. Many great things
have been birthed from The Slight Edge: The SUCCESS Foundation
(www.successfoundation.org) was created to provide teens with the fundamental
principles of personal development and the resources to help them reach their
full potential.
The organization even wrote the book SUCCESS for Teens: Real Teens Talk
About Living The Slight Edge, and have teamed up with stellar organizations such as Big
Brothers Big Sisters, Boys & Girls Clubs, Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship,
Just Say Yes, America’s Promise Alliance and Optimist International to get The
Slight Edge principles into the hands of millions of teenagers.
Two of the people I mentored at TPN, Darren Hardy and Kym Yancey, and
many others have gone on to do some great things. Darren went on to become
the publisher of SUCCESS magazine and authored a book The Compound
Effect based on the Slight Edge philosophy. Kym, along with his wife Sandra,
created E-Women Network, recognized as the No. 1 resource for connecting and
promoting women and their businesses worldwide. Another good friend, Todd
Smith, penned a great book called Little Things Matter, based on the Slight Edge
principles. These are wonderful books and I encourage you to go buy them to
learn more about their interpretation of the Slight Edge philosophy.
Many other readers of The Slight Edge have gone on to accomplish amazing
things by simply implementing the Slight Edge principles in their lives—many
of the stories we will share with you in this revised edition.

Origin of The Slight Edge
Over the years many people have asked me how The Slight Edge was
conceived. It began when the book was only a concept. To flesh it out I went to the
Mountain Shadow Resort in Phoenix to get away by myself and spent a weekend
listening to Jim Rohn and other legendary personal-development icons. Soon I
started to see an overall philosophy develop from all that I read and heard that
weekend. I didn’t have a name for it, and I couldn’t write down in words what it
meant at the time. The best way to convey it was to simply draw it out.

11

_
The Slight Edge

Slight Edge Life Paths
5% SUCCESS

EASY TO DO

Progressive realization of
a worthy idea

eco m
W h a t’ s un c o m f o r t a b l e e a r ly b

es c o

te

r

• Responsibility/Discipline
• Value Driven

N
A
N
C

ES

Simple disciplines made
consistently over time

la

r
mfo

ta

bl

e

FI

12

Past

PHILOSOPHY  ATTITUDE – ACTIONS – RESULTS – LIFESTYLE
W h at ’ s c o m f o r t a b l e e ar l y b e

comes

L
RE

NT

IO
AT

unc
om
for
ta
bl
e

BUSINESS
PER
DE SON
VE
LO AL
PM
E

S

IP

SH

N

r
te
la

• Blame/Neglect
• Entitled

H

ALT

HE

EASY NOT TO DO
Simple errors in judgement
made over time

95% FAILURE
Lasts a lifetime

Once on paper I came back home and drew it out on my office whiteboard to
further flesh out the concept. From this crude drawing I started to teach it out on
the road and it soon became known as the Slight Edge.
Everywhere I went people wanted me to give the Slight Edge speech. My next
task was to get it out of my head and onto paper so people could read it whenever
they wanted. I wrote the first 120 pages and then life got busy and the unfinished
manuscript sat on my credenza for years. Eventually I carved out the time to finish it.
What I’m about to say next is going to surprise you. I was never trying to
create a best seller with The Slight Edge. I was simply trying to get it out of my
brain and onto paper as fast as I could so people would stop hounding me about it.
This way I could point to the book without having to explain the entire philosophy.
First, I sent the book out to a few friends who wanted it, thinking that would
be it. But I received more calls from my friends telling me how much they got out of
reading the book, which I laughed at. I discounted much of what they were saying
because these were my close friends and I figured they were just being supportive.
But then I started getting calls from people who had received the book from my
close friends, and it mushroomed from there. All this time others were telling me this,
but I was too busy to notice. That’s when it hit me that we were on to something.
However, my daughter would say the day she knew we were on to something was
when she saw The Slight Edge listed on ABC’s website as The Bachelorette contestant

“Where I Could Be”

“Where I Am”

A

B

Foreword
Roberto Martinez’s favorite book. When he went on to win the show and Ali’s heart
she called me and said “The Slight Edge even helps you win reality TV shows!”
In all seriousness, the amazing thing is we hardly promoted the book. In fact,
it never had wide distribution because it could only be purchased by calling a 1-800
number. By simple word-of-mouth the book has exploded at a grassroots level—
completely organic. And now that we have seen how it is affecting so many lives I
wanted to make it better—to take it to the next level.
And if wasn’t for my daughter Amber pushing me to bring some of these stories
and testimonials to life, this revised edition wouldn’t exist. She was the driving force
behind this project and pushed me to make this book even better than it already is.

The Book That Started It All
The message I want to get across is this book is real. Over the years, people
have shared with me how the Slight Edge was working in their life. I told them
to give me their business card with the topic (either finances, health, sports, etc)
on the back and we would call them to get their story in writing. Let’s just say I
didn’t do a very good job in calling these wonderful people back. Amber finally
volunteered to call these people when she saw the drawer spilling over with
business cards of people anxious to share their stories.
Again, I want to thank my daughter for finding the time to call these
wonderful people and to personally thank them for sharing with me the stories
you are about to read.
I would be remiss if I didn’t give credit to the time period when The Slight
Edge debuted. Personal-development sections of bookstores exploded in the ’90s
and we were a part of that exciting time. People had finally begun to ask themselves,
What I am doing with my life? I want something more. Today we are experiencing a
similar revival. In time of economic distress, people start to prioritize what’s most
important to them and they want to be educated on how to get ahead.
I tell you all this so that before I start explaining the Slight Edge philosophy
you get to see how I came to understand the Slight Edge and how these principles
have stood the test of time by themselves—with or without my influence—and have
enabled people to accomplish amazing things. The principles you are about to learn
are time-tested, and it’s my deepest desire that you will embrace them to the fullest.
As a way to thank all of the readers, this revision is dedicated to all the past,
present and future readers of The Slight Edge. All we have done is plant the seed.
You are the ones who have watered and cultivated it to be what it is today.
Thank you,
Jeff Olson

13

14

The Slight Edge

What’s New in This Revised Edition?
In this revised edition we have meticulously gone through each chapter and
expanded it with new stories, as well as updates based upon observation of the
Slight Edge principles over the last five years.
There is a new chapter in this edition called 7 Slight Edge Principles. It’s
a collection of specific, actionable principles and characteristics that will help
you in applying the Slight Edge philosophy, which Part Two of the book is all
about. It is a good foundation on which to start your own personal-development
journey, all the while creating a positive ripple effect, by one action that creates
several positive reactions.
The one thing I am most excited about in this revised edition is the chance to
share with you the stories of many readers of The Slight Edge. We have received
thousands of amazing stories from readers explaining how The Slight Edge has
helped them with their personal relationships, finances, business, health, and life
pursuits just by injecting the Slight Edge philosophy into their lives. The results
have created a ripple effect having a lasting impact on everyone they meet. Their
stories explain the principles and real-life applications far better than I ever
could. I hope you will be moved by their stories as much as I was.
My daughter Amber contributed a section addressing the next generation of
readers of The Slight Edge. She has grown up with The Slight Edge and knows the
importance of getting this information into the hands of young people to help them
understand that the choices they make today will affect the rest of their lives.

Through my father and others, I have seen the impact
of a lifetime full of right and wrong decisions and where
they lead you. I am forever grateful to have had the
Slight Edge philosophy instilled in me at a young age by
my parents, because I was able to end up on the positive
side of the Slight Edge curve by being aware that the
choices I make on a daily basis matter.
—Amber Olson

I am excited and honored to announce the brand new Slight Edge online
community, an additional resource that gives readers of The Slight Edge a voice
to share their experiences with other like-minded individuals, as well as share
resources and Slight Edge tips, encourage and support one another, and experience
additional life-enriching information. Please come experience the slight edge
community at www.SlightEdge.org. I look forward to seeing you there!

Three Stories

The Water Hyacinth
The water hyacinth is a beautiful, delicate-looking little plant. Prized as
an ornament, it sports six-petaled flowers ranging from a lovely purplish blue,
to lavender, to pink. You can find it floating on the surface of ponds in warm
climates around the world.
The water hyacinth is also one of the most productive plants on earth; its
reproductive rate astonishes botanists and ecologists. Although a single plant
can produce as many as 5,000 seeds, the method it prefers for colonizing a new
area is to grow by doubling itself, sending out short runner stems that become
“daughter plants.”
If a pond’s surface is fairly still and undisturbed, the water hyacinth may
cover the entire pond in thirty days.
On the first day, you won’t even notice it. In fact, for the first few weeks you
will have to search very hard to find it. On day 15, it will cover perhaps a single
square foot of the pond’s surface ... a barely significant dollop of color dotting the
expanse of placid green.
On the twentieth day (two-thirds of the way to the end of the month), you
may happen to notice a dense little patch of floating foliage, about the size of a
small mattress. You would be easily forgiven if you mistook it for a boy’s inflatable
life raft, left behind during a family picnic.
On day 29, one-half of the pond’s surface will be open water.
On the thirtieth day, the entire pond will be covered by a blanket of
water hyacinth.
You will not see any water at all.

16

The Slight Edge

Two Frogs
One night, two frogs left the safety of their swamp and ventured into a
nearby farm to explore. They soon found themselves in a dairy. Hopping and
jumping around (frogs will be frogs, after all), they jumped into a milk pail half
full of cream.
At first, they were both thrilled. They had never tasted anything so delicious!
They drank and drank. Soon (after some contented frog belches followed by much
giggling) they were both full-bellied and getting just a bit sleepy. “Time to get out
of here and head back to the swamp for some shut-eye,” burped the first frog.
But there was a problem. They’d had no trouble hopping in ... but how to
hop out? The inside of the pail was too slippery to climb, and there was nothing
on which they could place their feet for traction to get up a good hopping distance
... or any hopping distance at all.
The awful reality dawned on them: they were trapped.
Frantic, they began to thrash about, their little frog feet scrabbling for a
foothold on the elusive, slippery curve of the pail’s edge.
Finally, the second frog cried out, “It’s no use! We’re doomed, my brother!
Let us save what dignity we have left and die here like frogs, with our eyes facing
our homeland!”
The first frog cried out to stop him. “No! We should never give up! When
we were tadpoles, which of us would ever have dreamed that some day we would
emerge from the water and hop about on land? Swim on, and pray for a miracle!”
The second frog eyed his brother sadly and said, “There are no miracles
in the life of a frog, brother. Farewell.” And so saying, he turned his face in the
direction of the swamp, gave a sigh, and slowly sank out of sight.
But the first frog refused to give up.
He continued to swim. He swam and he swam in ridiculous, pointless,
useless, futile circles, hoping against hope for a miracle. Fired by adrenaline, he
paddled mightily ... yet his brother’s dying words clutched at his thoughts, even
more insidious than the growing fatigue that tugged at his weakening muscles.
Was my brother right?, he thought desperately. Am I a fool? Are there no miracles
in the life of a frog?
Finally, he could swim no more ... and with a great cry of anguish, he stopped
paddling and let go, ready at last to face his fate like a frog.
But something odd then happened ... or rather, didn’t happen. He didn’t
sink. He just sat exactly where he was. Ever so tentatively, he stretched out a foot
... and felt it touch something solid.

Three Stories
He heaved a big sigh, both sad and grateful, said a silent farewell to his
drowned brother, then scrambled up on top of the big lump of butter he had just
finished churning ...
… and hopped out of the pail and off to the swamp, alone but alive.

The Choice
A wealthy man nearing the end of his days summoned his twin sons to
his bedside. Before he died, he told them, he wanted to pass on to them the
opportunity to experience the richness of life that he had enjoyed for his many
years on earth.
“If I could do so, I would give you both the world,” he told his boys, “but
this is not possible, for even I do not own the entire world and everything in it.
But there are three treasures I have had the good fortune to experience in my
life, and it is my fondest wish, my dying wish, that you would both have these
three treasures.
“The first gift is easy to give, and never runs out. I have been giving it to you
both since you were born, and die in peace knowing that you both already have
it in abundance.
“The second gift is easy to give, but not always easy to have. For some, it
never runs out, while for others, it constantly runs out. This gift I give you now,
but whether or not you keep it will be up to you.
“The third gift is impossible to give, but can only be gained. I have been
showing it to you both your entire lives, but cannot say whether or not you have
gained it. This gift I cannot give you, but I can give you an opportunity to see it
one last time before I die.”
The boys both wept to hear their father speak of his approaching death,
but he smiled and bade them hush with a wave of his hand.
“I see your grief, but in that grief you may be happy, for it is evidence
of the first gift, which you have in abundance. Do you know what the first
gift is?”
The two boys dried their tears and furrowed their brows in deep thought.
Easy to give, and it never runs out ...
Suddenly the first boy clapped his hands and said, “Love! The first gift
is love!” The father smiled. The boy was right. “And the second gift?” he
asked them.
They again became quiet with thought. Easy to give, but not always easy
to have ...

17

18

The Slight Edge
The second boy looked up with a start. “Money? Is the second gift money?”
It was indeed. For some, it never runs out, while for others, it constantly runs out.
“And the third?”
Impossible to give, can only be gained ...
This time both boys remained buried in thought. Neither could come up
with an answer.
The father smiled again, a little sadly this time. He lifted a beautiful lacquer
box from the bedside table onto his lap, opened it and looked inside.
“I offer you both a choice.”
He beckoned the boys to move closer.
“One month from today, you both will turn twenty-one. I will no longer be
with you, for my life has run its course. On that day, thirty-one days from now, I
have instructed my most trusted advisor to execute a document that will bequeath
my home, my treasury, my estate—all that I possess—to the good people of this
land, who have treated me with kindness all these years. This place, which has
been our home together for these twenty-one years, will become a public trust. I
will be well on my way to the next world, and the two of you will set off to make
your way in this one.
“Yet I do not wish you to set foot on this journey empty-handed. My last gift
to you, on the day of your departure, will be a purse to finance your adventures.
“What goes into each purse is your choice.”
He reached both hands inside the box, and then held them out to the boys.
In one hand, he held a sheaf of one thousand crisp, new $1,000 bills. One million
dollars. Cash. In the other hand, he held a shiny new copper penny.
“If you take the million in cash, you may take it with you or leave it in your
purse for safe-keeping until the day of your journey; your purse will be held by
my treasury director.
“If you take the penny, you may also take it with you or leave it in your
purse. However, if you choose the penny, my treasury director has instructions
to double the contents of your purse every day.”
He took out another lacquer box, identical to the first, opened it, and took
out another stack of $1,000 bills and another penny.
“Here is one million; here is one penny. You each have the same choice to
make. Whatever you do not take, I will return to my treasury to add to my estate.
“Now, go, rest, and think. Tomorrow morning, come back and tell me
your choice.”
All night, the first boy lay in bed thinking, What should I do? Which should
I take? What is the lesson? The second boy lay awake, too, but he asked himself

Three Stories
different questions. He had made his decision before his father had finished the
sentence. Now he was making careful plans for what to do for the next thirtyone days.
When morning came, the second boy sprang into action. After securing the
million in cash from his father, he hired a sharp consultant and a manager to
help him execute his carefully wrought plan. They rented out a hotel suite, in
which they conducted exhaustive, back-to-back interviews for the next six days.
By week’s end, they had hired a staff of the finest financial advisors in the land.
The boy’s new crackerjack money-man team spent the second week in
intensive, round-the-clock brainstorming sessions, drafting proposal after
proposal, seeking the smartest, most cost-effective investment and leveraging
strategies, both long-term and short-term, to help the wealthy man’s son turn his
million into a genuine fortune.
By week three, the best plans had been selected, winnowed, examined,
combed, explored, game-theoried, road-tested, computer-simulated and
dissected. With all their i’s dotted and all their t’s crossed, the boy’s advisors
were locked and loaded and ready to rumble. Off they went, into the battlefields
of commerce and speculation. The boy spent the next few days keeping in close
contact with his far-flung financial team by telephone; but by mid-week, it
seemed clear that things were well in hand and he was not needed. He decided to
pay a visit to his brother, whom he had not seen since breakfast on the morning
after that long and sleepless night.
When he arrived at their home, he was shocked to hear his brother’s account
of the past few weeks.
After that excited breakfast, the first boy had also paid a visit to his father,
but without explaining why, he announced that he had made the second choice.
He had taken the penny, left it in the purse, then returned to his room and began
reading from one of his favorite books.
The second day, he visited again, and was allowed to peek into the purse: the
shiny new penny had been joined by a companion. On the third day, he found four
pennies. On the fourth, there were eight, and on the fifth, sixteen, then thirty-two.
By the end of the week, just as his brother’s ace financial team was assembling
in the beautiful hotel suite for the first time, he had amassed a nest egg of sixtyfour cents. By the end of week two—with nearly half the month gone—his piles
of pennies had swelled to just shy of ninety dollars ... $81.92, to be exact.
On the day his brother’s financial team hit the streets and went out into the
world ready to turn his million into billions, his purse had not yet accumulated a
hundred dollars—he would not have been able to purchase even a decent dinner

19

20

The Slight Edge
for two at the fine hotel where his brother’s suite had been humming with action
for two weeks.
Now, a few days into the third week, the purse’s contents had grown a bit
more: he now had a sum of $655 (“and thirty-six cents,” he proudly pointed
out)—easily enough to sustain him on the road for a full week.
“But you poor sap!” his brother cried on hearing his story. “I can’t believe
you went for the penny! It’s not too late—visit our father, see if he will relent and
give you your own million. Or if he insists in prorating the amount, then even
just half the million—it’s better than scrabbling by on a few paltry hundred! And
if he refuses, you’ve got to let me help ... I can’t stand the idea of you venturing
out into the world with scarcely enough to feed yourself for a week!”
But the brother seemed unperturbed and wouldn’t hear of it.
Later that week, the wealthy man called his sons to him one more time and
spent several hours with them, sharing memories and telling stories. They both
left him in good spirits (though the second boy was secretly very worried about
his brother’s prospects).
That night, the old man died peacefully in his sleep.
Toward the end of week four, the second boy’s top advisors brought him
some worrisome news. The markets, it seemed, had gone a bit soft. Taken a bit of
a tumble, actually. The team had acted quickly and salvaged what they could, but
their earlier rosy projections would most certainly need to be revised downward.
The boy thanked them for their vigilance, and waited, fretting and anxious.
At the close of the week, the team brought mixed news. Some investments
had performed quite well, others had suffered. All in all, the boy had made a
modest gain: starting with his one million in cash, his team had succeeded in
parleying that into nearly one and a half million. Unfortunately, his expenses,
including their commissions, tax, bills for the hotel suite, broker fees and the
rest, came to just over half a million.
The boy had ended the month with just a bit less than he started!
In a panic, he rushed to see his brother, to see how he had fared with his
$655 (and thirty-six cents)—only to receive yet another shock. On day 28, his
brother’s purse of pennies had passed the million-dollar mark. On day 29, the
two-and-a-half million mark. Yesterday, on day 30, it had doubled to more than
five million!
The boy who chose the penny had discovered the extraordinary power that
some have called “the eighth wonder of the world”—the remarkable creative
force of compound interest.

Three Stories
And today, the boy who chose the penny was worth more than ten million
dollars—$10,737,418 ... and twenty-four cents.

A Question
Two boys. Two frogs. Two powerful choices. Riches or poverty. Life
or death.
You are making those same choices, every day, every hour, and the choices
you make are spreading out through your life, just like the water hyacinth. You
may not see the results today, or tomorrow, or even next year. In fact, by the time
you do finally see the results, the process will probably be so far along that the
surface of the pond will be completely covered.
The question is, covered with what?
When the wealthy man spoke to his sons, the second boy thought he was
offering them a choice of which money to take. But the first boy listened more
carefully. He remembered that money was only the second gift. He understood
that the choice was not whether to take the penny or the sheaf of bills—the choice
was whether or not to take the third gift.
Wisdom.
The lesson was not about money: it was about wisdom. It was a lesson about
compound interest, leverage, geometric progression and growth. It was a lesson
about the Slight Edge.
The choice the wealthy man offered his two sons is the same choice the
world offers you, every day, every hour: sickness or health; sinking poverty or
abundant wealth; deepening loneliness and alienation or a rich and growing
circle of friends.
The Slight Edge will be your guide to the wealthy man’s third gift; it will help
you learn habits of thought and action that will allow you to choose the penny
doubled, every time. It will keep you paddling until your cream becomes butter.
It will give you the power to choose what to plant in your life, so that you will end
up completely blanketing the surface of the pond with the blossoms of your choice.

21

PART ONE

The Slight Edge

CHAPTER 1

The Slight Edge Philosophy

The law of nature is, Do the thing, and you shall have the
power: but they who do not the thing have not the power.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson, Compensation (Essays: First Series, 1841)

Take two seemingly similar people and give them both the exact same
opportunity. One takes it and has remarkable success, the other doesn’t. One
wins, the other does not.
Why?
During my years in business, I’ve worked with several thousand people from
every imaginable walk of life. They have all had the exact same opportunity. (A
number of these people have become millionaires, to the point that somewhere
along the way I picked up the nickname “The Millionaire Maker.”) Many more
people I have worked with have earned a good, solid living. But the great majority
of them, faced with exactly the same opportunities, have gone nowhere.
Why? It’s not a matter of luck. Nor is it timing, nor fate. It’s not a matter of
intelligence, skill or talent, either.
During these same years, I’ve risen to the very top with many different
companies, with different product lines, in different countries and different
languages (which I don’t speak). In case you’re worried that I’m bragging, let me
put your mind at ease: there was absolutely nothing brilliant about what I did.
Actually, it was quite the opposite. In every case, I did the exact same thing every
time, using ridiculously simple strategies made up of ridiculously simple lists of
ridiculously simple actions.

26

The Slight Edge
And in case you’re now thinking that I’m exaggerating, that those are
statements of false modesty, let me put your mind at ease about that, too. The
strategies I used—none of them invented or devised by me, incidentally—are
so simple that if you and I sat down together in a room for twenty minutes, I
could show you exactly what I did to create four different, separate, independent
multimillion-dollar organizations—and teach you how to do the exact same
thing. In twenty minutes.
And chances are, it wouldn’t work for you.
Why not? Because how to do it is not the issue. Because, if we don’t change
the way you think, then you’ll have rearranged what I said by the time you leave
the room. You’ll have reinvented it by the time you go to bed that night and in the
morning, you won’t even recognize it as the same information.
People everywhere are clamoring for the formula, the secret, the path to
improve their lives. Tell me how you did this, so I can do it, too. Give me the
definitive plan. Tell me how to be healthy. Tell me how to be rich. Tell me how
to be happy. Tell me, tell me, tell me ... and there’s more good, solid how-to
information available today about all those things than there’s ever been in
history. But that’s not how it works. If you’re one of the millions looking for
cookie-cutter answers to the great questions in life, you can call off the search
right now! How to do it is not the issue.
If “how to do it” were the answer, it’d be done. It’s how you do
the “hows” that’s most important. If access to the right
information were the answer, we’d all be rich, healthy, happy and fulfilled.
And most of us are none of those things.
Why not? Because the answer is only the answer—it isn’t actually doing
the thing. It isn’t applying the answer, living the answer. It’s only information.
It’s not that how-to books are not valuable; there are some wonderful ones
I’ll even recommend to you at the end of this book. It’s just that another how-to
book is not what you need. It’s not what any of us need. We already have enough
of those—maybe more than enough. Because what you need to transform your
life is not more information.
Besides, we’re all so different; my how-to may not be yours. It may work for
me, but it may not be the how-to that works for you. As much as we’d all love
to quantify a precise, specific, paint-by-the-numbers approach to life, love and
happiness, we are out of luck in that department because there is no universal,
one-size-fits-all method to anything. However ...

The Slight Edge Philosophy 27

The Secret Ingredient
However, there is a secret ingredient.
There is a secret that, once you know it, will cause you to find those answers,
apply them, live them, and achieve those results you want.
The secret ingredient is your philosophy. The secret is to change the way you
think. Once you do, then you will take the steps you need to take, to lead you to
the how-to’s you need. If you don’t change your thinking, no amount of how-to’s
will offer a real solution. It’s not the “hows,” it’s how you do the “hows.”
This isn’t about self-hypnosis, or about conjuring up the impossible through
sheer positive thinking, or any other kind of hocus-pocus. And I’m not talking
about some complex, elaborate or heady system of ideas. And—although I’ll
completely understand if you find the last part of this sentence truly difficult to
believe—what I’m talking about is not difficult to do.
It simply means changing your thinking. Your philosophy.
The reason diets and other how-to’s don’t work for most people is the same
reason most how-to books and courses don’t work for most people. It isn’t

that the actions are wrong. It’s that people don’t keep
doing them.

Focusing on the actions (the what-to-do’s and the how-to-do it’s) is not
enough, because it’s the attitude behind the actions that keeps those actions
in place.
Aha! It’s attitudes! So, what I need is an attitude adjustment ...
No, that won’t necessarily do it either. Your emotions change. You can’t
dictate how you feel. No matter how much you may tell yourself to feel positive
about this how-to step or that how-to step, what if you just don’t? Today, you’re
excited about getting fit. You feel like doing your twenty minutes on the treadmill.
Great! But what if tomorrow you just don’t feel like doing it?
To find the path to success, you have to back up one more step. It’s the
understanding behind the attitudes that are behind the actions.

It’s the philosophy. That’s the secret ingredient.
Your philosophy is what you know, how you hold it,
and how it affects what you do. That’s what this book
is about.
Yes, you have to know the winning how-to actions, and you have to possess
the winning attitudes—but what generates all that and keeps it all in place is
your philosophy.

your

philosophy

your attitude
your actions
your results

creates

The Slight Edge

creates

28

your
LIFE

A positive philosophy turns into a positive attitude, which turns into
positive actions, which turn into positive results, which turn into a positive
lifestyle.
A negative philosophy turns into a negative attitude, which turns
into negative actions, which turn into negative results, which turn into a
negative lifestyle.

Life Wisdom
What do I mean by philosophy? Not something lofty or abstract; not
something you need to go to graduate school or learn Greek to understand. I
mean something so simple, so basic, a six-year-old child can understand it.
Here is an example.

Do the thing, and you shall have the power.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson, Compensation

Profoundly simple and just as powerful. The sort of wisdom you can actually
apply in everyday life. Nike simplified it for the MTV generation (“Just do it”),
but I like the Emerson version better, and we’ll be using it a good deal later on
when we talk about applying the Slight Edge to your life.

There are two prevalent types of attitudes: entitled
and value-driven. A value-driven attitude says, “What can I do to help

you?” An entitled attitude says, “What have you done for me lately?” An entitled
attitude says, “Pay me more, and then maybe I’ll work harder.” A value-driven
attitude says, “I’ll work harder, and then I expect you’ll pay me more.”
Which of these attitudes is driven by Emerson’s philosophy, “Do the thing
and you’ll have the power”?
Your philosophy is what you know, how you hold what you know, and how
it affects what you do. You can look at anyone’s actions and trace back, through
the attitudes behind those actions, to their source: the philosophy behind the
attitudes. Show me what a man does, and I’ll show you what his philosophy is.

The Slight Edge Philosophy 29
Here’s another example of a life philosophy:

The formula for success is quite simple:
double your rate of failure.
— Thomas J. Watson, Sr. (founder of IBM)

We are not taught that the key to success is to “double your rate of failure.”
On the contrary, we’re taught to avoid failure like the plague. “Failure is not an
option!” Really? It had better be an option! It had better be, because whether or
not you consider it an option, it’s going to happen.
If you go through life with the philosophy that “failure is not an option,”
then you’ll never have any good opportunities to learn. (Which won’t really
matter anyway, because if failing is not an option, chances are you won’t even try
in the first place!)
If Babe Ruth had had the philosophy, “Failure is not an option,” then you
and I would have never heard of him. Why? Because not only did Babe Ruth set
a world record for home runs, he also led the league in strikeouts.
Michael Jordan, considered by many as one of the greatest basketball
players of all time (winning six NBA titles with the Chicago Bulls), didn’t make
the varsity team as a sophomore because they thought he was too small. The
next two years he grew four inches, honed his game … and the rest, as they say,
is history.
Abraham Lincoln had an extraordinary record of lost elections and publicoffice failures over the course of his career. For the ungainly lawyer from Illinois,
failure was not only an option, it was practically his specialty. If it hadn’t been, he
would never have made it to the White House.
And it’s hard to imagine just what our lives would be like today if Thomas
Edison had subscribed to the “Failure is not an option” philosophy. In his efforts
to find a stable filament to make his electric light bulb invention work, he tried
out thousands of different versions and every single one failed. His comment: “I
have not failed. I’ve simply discovered ten thousand ways that don’t work.”
Successful people fail their way to the top!

The Slight Edge Philosophy
Your philosophy is your view of life, something beyond feelings and attitudes.
Your philosophy drives your attitudes and feelings, which drive your actions.
By and large, people are looking in the wrong places. They are looking for a
breakthrough, looking for that amazing “quantum leap”—the philosophy of the

30

The Slight Edge
craps table and roulette wheel. I don’t believe they’ll ever find it. I’ve had colossal
failures, and I’ve had remarkable successes, and my experience is, neither one
happens in quantum leaps. They happen through the Slight Edge.
The purpose of this book is to have you understand the Slight Edge
philosophy, to make it part of how you see the world and how you live your life
every day. To understand patience; to understand that little steps, compounded,
do make a difference. That the things you do every single day, the things that
don’t look dramatic, that don’t even look like they matter, do matter. That they
not only make a difference—they make all the difference.
Throughout this book, if you look carefully, you’ll find at least a dozen
statements (and if you look really closely, many dozens!) that embody this
philosophy, statements such as “Do the thing, and you shall have the power.”
Here are a few more examples that you’ll come across in the following pages:

Success is the progressive realization of a worthy
ideal.
Successful people do what unsuccessful people
are not willing to do.
There is a natural progression to everything in
life: plant, cultivate, harvest.

Here’s a suggestion that can maximize how much you get out of this book—
that is, not only reading it, but also absorbing it and applying it in your life: every
time you come to a fundamental statement of philosophy, highlight it. Then
go back regularly and read through just those highlighted sections: your own
personal guide to the Slight Edge philosophy.
The Slight Edge is also the philosophy embodied in the three stories you read
in the beginning of this book. It is understanding the tremendous potential of
something as seemingly insignificant as a penny. It is knowing how to recognize
and harness the power of the water hyacinth. It’s having faith in the process of
simple, positive actions repeated over time, the faith that miracles do happen—if
you know when to trust the process and keep churning the cream.

Just Add Life and Stir ...
The Slight Edge philosophy is the missing ingredient you need for all the
personal-development books, how-to’s and life guides to work.
If you don’t grasp the truth of the Slight Edge, then no matter what health
books you read, you’re not going to be willing to do the little things that lead

The Slight Edge Philosophy 31
you to a healthy life. No matter what you learn, no matter how many books
you read, CDs you listen to, or seminars you attend, if you don’t absorb this
philosophy of simple steps and their compounded effect over time, you won’t
successfully apply those things you learn to create the results you want.
The Slight Edge will help you apply all the information you learn from the
health book, the sales book, the investment book, the positive attitude book. The
Slight Edge is the book you need to read, highlight and reread along with your
fitness class, your career planning, your continuing education and pursuit of
new skills.
The Slight Edge will prepare you to be able to absorb all that other
information, guidance and education from all those other books, classes, situations
and experiences.
Whatever your deepest desires are in life, I want you to have them, and I
know you can. That is my passionate belief—and I’ve seen it happen too many
times to doubt it. But you need a place to start. The Slight Edge is that starting
point. It’s the first ingredient.

Key Points of Chapter 1
People everywhere are clamoring for the formula, the secret ingredient, the path
to improve their lives. The secret ingredient is your philosophy: what you know, how
you hold it and how it affects what you do. Once you change the way you think then
you can take the steps that will lead you to the “how-to’s.”
The things you do every day, the things that don’t look like they matter, do
matter. They not only make a difference—they make all the difference.

Apply the Slight Edge Principles and Stir!
I have used the principles of the Slight Edge to improve my
physical fitness, starting with one push-up and one sit-up a
day, adding another each day and building to over 100 per
day. I have used it to help pay off debt, build my savings and
investments, and improve my relationships with my children.

— Stan Snow, North Yarmouth, ME

32

The Slight Edge

I have applied the Slight Edge principles in so many areas
of life. Chunking every project into annual goals, monthly
outcomes, weekly agendas and daily disciplines has helped
me accomplish massive improvements in every area of
life from health to relationships, to communication skills, to
finances. By identifying the daily disciplines in every area of
life, I was able to move from cancer to outstanding health;
from non-communication with siblings to best friends; from
struggling as a single mom to creating a net worth of over 1
million dollars! The Slight Edge principles, compounded over
time, will make a massive shift in any area we choose.

—Linda Kedy, Destin, FL

By applying the principles of the
Slight Edge, I’ve
lost 35 pounds in just three mo
nths, and am still
going strong. I’m also working
the principles into my
job, part-time pursuits and eve
ry area of my life. I
have quit focusing as much on
the goals, and am
focusing more on the little thin
gs I do every day,
since I can control those.

—Richard Green, Franklin, TN

cided to
e Slight Edge I de
After reading Th
area of
y
sophies into ever
apply the philo
for my
py
co
er, I bought a
my life. As a fath
of
om
isd
w
imparting the
.
kids and started
do
to
t
no
y
easy to do/eas
ho
w
things that are
s
nt
tie
pa
rted giving my
of
As a doctor, I sta
py
co
a
s
ith hopelessnes
were dealing w
perback.
it is Prozac in pa
em
th
ll
te
I
.
ok
bo
the
Slight Edge
plemented the
As an author, I im
r every role
Fo
l.
books as wel
y
m
to
in
es
pl
ci
prin
applications
are Slight Edge
in your life there
e!
huge differenc
that will make a

mond, OK

—Baker Fore, Ed

CHAPTER 2

The Secret of Easy Things

’Tis a gift to be simple, ’tis a gift to be free,
’Tis a gift to come down where you ought to be,
And when we find ourselves in the place just right
’Twill be in the valley of love and delight.
— traditional Shaker hymn

Have you ever met a really successful person? You know whom I mean: that
woman with the easy, engaging smile, the one who makes you feel instantly at
ease, even as you stand in awe of her accomplishments. The guy who’s always
dressed for success, who looks great even when he isn’t trying, and somehow
makes you feel better about yourself just being in his presence. People who not
only are successful, but also seem to breathe success and fill the space around
them with it.
They live in beautiful homes, travel to exciting places, fly first class. Are
surrounded by people who love them and admire them. Are appreciated, respected
and recognized. Happy, healthy, creative and fulfilled. Winners in the game of life.
Why do some families have such great relationships, such warmth and
fun and caring closeness, while others are perennially angry with each other,
so distrustful and distant they might as well live on different planets? Why are
some people positive and upbeat while others are miserably negative, constantly
complaining and criticizing?

34

The Slight Edge
Why is it some people never seem to manage the time to stay in shape, while
others run a few miles each day even though their lives are just as busy? Why are
some people digging deeper and deeper into debt, while others just keep earning
more money?
Why is it that some people seem to make dream after dream come true, while
others spend their lives building someone else’s dream? Why are some people
successful, and some people failures?
What’s the difference—really?

What Do Successful People Do?
You’ve probably read and heard lots of statistics. Happy versus unhappy
marriages, health versus illness, how many retirees barely survive on fixed
incomes versus how many reach their golden years in comfort and security.
There are a hundred and one ways to measure it, but if you simply look around
you, you can see it: most of us aren’t making it.
My observation is that about one person in twenty is achieving a significant
measure of his or her goals in life: financial, professional, personal, marital,
spiritual, in terms of health, in whatever terms you want to look at. Ninety-five
percent are either failing or falling short.
What are the five percent doing that the ninety-five percent are not?
There is only one difference. It is not heredity, education, looks, talent or
inheritance. It is not “preparedness meeting opportunity,” and it’s not chance,
either. They all understand the Slight Edge and how it is working for or
against them.
If you will learn to understand and apply the Slight Edge, I will guarantee
you that in time—and chances are, less time than you would imagine—you will
have what you desire. You will be among the five percent. You will be successful.
And you will achieve those aims, goals and dreams by doing simple things.
A bold claim, I know, and I make it only because I know it’s true—I’ve seen
it too many times to doubt it. If you learn to understand and apply the Slight
Edge, your life will become filled with hundreds of thousands of small, seemingly
insignificant actions—all of them easy to do, none of them mysterious, complex
or difficult. And those actions will create your success.

That’s what successful people do: simple things
that are easy to do.

The Secret of Easy Things

Simple Things
“Wait a minute. How are these simple, everyday actions supposed to create
all this wonderful happiness, health and success for me, if they’re all easy to do—
if anyone could do them? If these are things anyone can do, why are only five
percent successful?”
Excellent question. Because they’re all also easy not to

do—and while anyone could do them, most won’t.

Fundamentally, we all take pretty much the same actions every day. We eat,
sleep, think, feel, talk and listen. We have relationships and friendships. We each
have twenty-four hours a day, 8,760 hours a year, and we each fill these hours one
way or the other with a sequence of little tasks and actions, any one of which is
seemingly insignificant.
Gold medal marathon runners eat and sleep. So do people who are thirty
pounds overweight. Successful entrepreneurs think and feel and have relationships
with other people. So do those who are unemployed or even living on the streets.
People who make lots of money read books. People who are broke read books, too.
The successful and unsuccessful both do the same basic things in their lives,
day in and day out. Yet the things successful people do take them to the top, while
the things unsuccessful people do take them down and out.
So what’s the difference? The difference is their awareness, understanding
and use of the Slight Edge in their life and work.
Successful winners understand the Slight Edge.
Unsuccessful people do not.
The difference that will make all the difference between success and failure,
between achieving the quality of life you want and settling for less than you desire
and deserve, lies one hundred percent in which of those little, “insignificant”
actions you choose to do. This is why we are all capable of doing what it takes to
be successful. We are all capable of being winners ... and yes, that includes you.
The Slight Edge is always working. For you or against you, the Slight Edge
is already, always at work in all our lives. The purpose of this book is to help you
become aware of it—how it is working in your life, every day, every hour, every
moment, in every step you take and every choice you make.

Easy to Do ... Easy Not to Do
Everything you need to do to transform your life is easy to do.
It’s easy to become healthy, fit and vibrant. It’s easy to become financially

35

36

The Slight Edge
independent. It’s easy to have a happy family and a life rich with meaningful
friendships.
Tapping into the Slight Edge means doing things that are easy. Simple little
disciplines that, done consistently over time, will add up to the very biggest
accomplishments.
It’s easy to have everything you ever wanted in your life. Every action you
need to take to make any and all of your dreams come true is easy. So why is it,
then, that the masses are unhappy, unhealthy and financially bound?
Every action that any of these goals requires is easy to do. Here’s the

problem: every action that is easy to do, is also easy
not to do.

Why are these simple yet crucial things easy not to do? Because if you don’t
do them, they won’t kill you ... at least, not today. You won’t suffer, or fail or blow
it—today. Something is easy not to do when it won’t bankrupt you, destroy your
career, ruin your relationships or wreck your health—today.
What’s more, not doing it is usually more comfortable than doing it would
be. But that simple, seemingly insignificant error in judgment, compounded
over time, will kill you. It will destroy you and ruin your chances for success. You
can count on it. It’s the Slight Edge.

That’s the choice you face every day, every hour:
A simple, positive action, repeated over time.
A simple error in judgment, repeated over time.

You can always count on the Slight Edge. And unless you make it work for
you, the Slight Edge will work against you.

Invisible Results
If I could have had a magic wand that day in the Phoenix airport as I sat
thinking and having my shoes shined, one of the first things I would have done
would have been to wave it at the little pile of paperbacks. I would have waved the
wand and Presto! Now there would be a little reading table piled with Napoleon
Hill, James Allen, Stephen Covey and George S. Clason. Because the simple
truth is, how you feed your mind is every bit as critical to your happiness as how
you feed your body.
Seeing how naturally open-minded and intellectually curious the shoeshine
woman was, I have no doubt she would have dove into any one of these books
with gusto.
But then we would have run into a problem.

The Secret of Easy Things
Everything you need to know to be successful—every how-to, every
practical action—is already written in books like these. Here’s a Slight Edge
action guaranteed to change your life: read just ten pages of a good book, a book
aimed at improving your life, every day.
If you read ten pages of a good book today, will your life change? Of course
not. If you don’t read ten pages of a good book today, will your life fall apart? Of
course not.
I could tell my shoeshine friend that if she would agree to read ten pages
of one of these good books every single day, over time, she could not help but
accumulate all the knowledge she’d ever need to be as successful as she ever
wanted to be—successful enough to send her daughter to that cheerleading
camp and hey, to send her to the best college in the country if she wanted. Like
a penny over time, reading ten pages a day would compound, just like that, and
create a ten-million-dollar bank of knowledge in her.
Would she do it? On day 1, sure. And day 2. And maybe day 3. But
would she still be doing it by the end of the week? If she did keep reading,
over the course of the year she would have read 3,650 pages—the equivalent
of one or two dozen books of life-transforming material! Would her life have
changed? Absolutely. No question. But here, back in week 1, all that’s still an
invisible result.
And that is exactly why most people never learn to recognize or understand
the Slight Edge, the reason most people never learn how to make the Slight Edge
work for them, and why the Slight Edge ends up working against them:
When you make the right choice, you won’t see the results. At least,
not today.
We live in a result-focused world. We expect to see results, and we expect to
see them now. Push the button, the light flicks on. Step on the scale, look in the
mirror, check the account balance online 24/7. Give me feedback, trip a sensor,
hit a buzzer, tell me, tell me, tell me it’s working!
But that’s not how success is built. Success is the progressive
realization of a worthy ideal. “Progressive” means success is a
process, not a destination. It’s something you experience gradually, over time.
Failure is also just as gradual. In fact, the difference between success and failure
is so subtle, you can’t even see it or recognize it during the process. And here’s
how real success is built: by the time you get the feedback,
the real work’s already done. When you get to the point where
everyone else can see your results, tell you what good choices you’ve made,

37

38

The Slight Edge
notice your good fortune, slap you on the back and tell you how lucky you are,
the critical Slight Edge choices you made are ancient history. And chances are, at
the time you actually made those choices, nobody noticed but you. And even you
wouldn’t have noticed—unless you understood the Slight Edge.
Invisible results.

The Cost of Waiting
I’m sure you’ve heard about the power of compounding interest before. In
fact, you’ve probably heard about it many times. What makes this time different?
Nothing—unless you act on it.
The single most important thing I can tell you about the Slight Edge is this:
it’s already working, right now, either for you or against you. So don’t wait.
My hope for you—my request for you—is that before you reach the last page
of this book, you will have put in place a Slight Edge financial plan for yourself so
that you are consistently building your equity. Some simple, daily (or weekly, or
monthly) discipline that, over time, will buy your financial freedom.
Easy to do? Surprisingly so. Easy not to do? Tragically so.
To give you a sense of the cost of waiting, look at the following example.
Let’s say you and your best friend are both twenty-four years old; you both
read The Slight Edge and decide you’d like to start putting away $2,000 a year
into an IRA so you’ll retire at age sixty-five with over a million dollars.
Your friend starts doing it now. You wait. You don’t get around to it this year,
or next, or the next ... in fact, you procrastinate for the next six years.
At the beginning of year 7, you ask your friend how his IRA is doing. You
are stunned when he tells you that he’s finished: after investing $2,000 a year for
six years at twelve percent, he’s all set. By the age of sixty-five, the little financial
ball he’s started rolling will have snowballed into over one million dollars—even
if he never puts in another penny!
That’s it, you decide, it’s time for action. You start putting in your $2,000
each year. How many years will it take before you’ve caught up to your friend? In
other words, by what age will you be able to stop investing your annual $2,000,
like he did?
You can’t believe your eyes when you see the answer: you’re going to
have to keep investing that $2,000 every single year until the age of sixty-two!

Your six years of procrastination has cost you thirtythree years of investing—that’s twenty-seven more
years and $54,000 more invested just to arrive at the
same place!

The Secret of Easy Things

The Cost of Waiting
Your Friend 			
		
Age Payment
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

$2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

You

Accum. 				
Total
Payment
$2,240
4,749
7,559
10,706
14,230
18,178
20,359
22,803
25,539
28,603
32,036
35,880
40,186
45,008
50,409
56,458
63,233
70,821
79,320
88,838
99,499
111,438
124,811
139,788
156,563
175,351
196,393
219,960
246,355
275,917
309,028
346,111
387,644
434,161
486,261
544,612
609,966
683,162
765,141
856,958
959,793
$1,074,968

0
0
0
0
0
0
$2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
0
0
0

Accum.
Total
0
0
0
0
0
0
$2,240
4,749
7,559
10,706
14,230
18,178
22,599
27,551
33,097
39,309
46,266
54,058
62,785
72,559
83,507
95,767
109,499
124,879
142,105
161,397
183,005
207,206
234,310
264,668
298,668
336,748
379,398
427,166
480,665
540,585
607,695
682,859
767,042
861,327
966,926
$1,085,197

39

40

The Slight Edge
“But what if I’m not twenty-four—what if I’m forty-four? Or sixty-four?
Does that mean I’ve missed the boat—are you saying it’s too late for me?”
Not at all. You’re never too old, and it’s never too late, to start applying Slight
Edge tactics to achieve your dreams, financial and otherwise. In fact, best-selling
author David Bach has written an excellent book titled Start Late, Finish Rich,
addressing exactly that issue. Like all the other books I list in the Appendix, it’s
a great companion to The Slight Edge. My point is simply that there is a cost
to waiting.

It’s never too late to start.
It’s always too late to wait.

Just ask Ramona B. Jenkins of Baltimore, a fan of The Slight Edge:
Before reading The Slight Edge, money management wasn’t one of my strong
suits. After reading and re-reading the book several times, I began depositing a
designated amount from each paycheck into a savings account, which soon became a
compound interest-bearing account. It has been amazing to see the results of a simple
decision to consistently save.
I hope like Ramona you decide to make a Slight Edge commitment to your
financial future.

What You Do Matters
I am as passionate about personal health and fitness as I am about financial
health. I believe your health is your most prized possession. It amazes me how
many people pay no attention to their health.
Do you know anyone who would eat a quart of Crisco or a pound of butter
a day? Hey, my cholesterol’s down to 239, I need to get it up over 400. There are
still a few arteries flowing and I need to get ’em all clogged, right now, today! Does
anyone believe that’s the way to good health? Of course not. Then why do we
act like we do?
You know what you’re supposed to eat. We all do. Fresh fruits and
vegetables, complex carbs, salads, whole foods, lean meats, more fish and
poultry than beef ... You know it, I know it, we all know it. So why do so many of
us still go out and chow down cheeseburgers and fries every day?
I’ll tell you why: because it won’t kill us. Not today.
If you ate a cheeseburger and immediately suffered a near-fatal heart attack,
would you ever go near a cheeseburger again? I doubt it. It may take twenty or
thirty years, but when you add up the compounded interest on all that high-fat,

The Secret of Easy Things
artery-clogging dietary mayhem, eventually your poor overworked heart just
quits, stops dead. And so do you. It has been said that we dig our graves with
our teeth.
It’s easy to eat well. And it’s easy not to.
It’s not the one junk-food meal; it’s the thousands, over time. Eating the
burger is just a simple error in judgment. Not eating it, a simple positive action.
Eating it won’t kill you—today. But compounded over time, it can and will. Not
eating it won’t save you—today. But compounded over time, it can and will.
A simple, positive action. A simple error in judgment. Either way, it’s the
Slight Edge at work—working for you or working against you. For example, if
you read 10 pages of a good book today will you see success? No. If you don’t
read 10 pages of a good book a day will you see failure? No. They look the
same today.
Invisible results.
Why do you walk past the exercise bike? Because it’s easy. If you don’t
exercise today, will that kill you? No, of course not. You know what you need
to do to stay healthy and feel fit and live a long life. Get your heart rate up, a
little over normal, for twenty minutes, three times a week. You know it, I know it,
everyone knows it. And it’s easy to do.
But it’s also easy not to do. And if you don’t do it today, or tomorrow, or the
next day, you won’t suddenly drop dead, and you won’t suddenly put on twenty
pounds, and you won’t suddenly lose all your muscle tone and flop around
like a marionette with his strings cut off. But that simple error in judgment,
compounded over time, will take you down and out.
It is the same with your health, your diet, your exercise, your financial
habits, your knowledge, your relationships, your marriage. With anything and
everything. With your life.
You see one person eating a good meal, and the person next to him eating an
awful meal. One person saving a penny, another spending a penny. One taking
a brisk walk, another sitting and watching the news. Is there any difference
between the two? Nothing you can see ... not today, and probably not tomorrow.
It’s easy to conclude that it doesn’t really make any difference.
The difference between success and failure is not dramatic. In fact, the
difference between success and failure is so subtle, most people miss it. They hold
the philosophy that what they do doesn’t really matter. It’s not hard to see how
people come to this understanding of life. I don’t blame them. It’s completely
understandable. It’s just not the truth.

41

42

The Slight Edge

The truth is, what you do matters. What you do
today matters. What you do every day matters.
Successful people just do the things that seem
to make no difference in the act of doing them
and they do them over and over and over until the
compound effect kicks in.
Those little things that will make you successful in life, that will secure
your health, your happiness, your fulfillment, your dreams, are simple,
subtle, tiny things that nobody will see, nobody will applaud, nobody will
even notice. They are those things that, at the time you do them, often feel
like they make absolutely no difference ... like they don’t matter.
They do.

Key Points of Chapter 2
If you learn to understand and apply the Slight Edge, your life will become
filled with hundreds of thousands of small, seemingly insignificant actions—all
of them easy to do, none of them mysterious, complex or difficult. These are the
actions that will create your success.
That’s what successful people do: simple things that are easy to do. Here’s
the problem: every action that is easy to do, is also easy not to do. If you don’t
do them, you won’t suffer, or fail or blow it—today. But that simple error in
judgment, compounded over time will ruin your chances for success.

It’s the Little Things That Matter
As an actress living in New York, it is so easy to get overwhelmed by
everything that comes with this competitive business. The Slight Edge
helped me to understand that the small choices I make every moment
of every day make a huge impact on my life. Living in a society with so
much emphasis on success, I found that The Slight Edge redefined what
success is for me. It helps me to take the next step forward in my everyday
life and do the next right thing. I know those steps will ultimately lead to a
very successful and fulfilling life.

—Cara Cooley, Spokane, WA

The Secret of Easy Things

ed by success tips.
ere we are bombard
We live in a world wh
Edge is a lifestyle
we do not. The Slight
Some we apply, some
st fail to discover—
way of living that mo
to me, not a tip. It is a
rld we live in. The
instant gratification wo
especially now in this
easy to do and
ing key things that are
habit is ...
Slight Edge is about do
important Slight Edge
st
mo
my
,
me
r
Fo
.
easy not to do
in every situation, no
g something positive
looking for and findin
matter what.
omings,
negative, our shortc
the
e
se
to
us
in
tra
es
g. It is just
Life experienc
for what we did wron
k
loo
To
s.
ion
at
situ
and react to
ild on that. Life
at we did well and bu
them for
as easy to look for wh
to grow if we just see
ies
nit
rtu
po
op
s
rou
gives us nume
.
what they can mean
Edge daily has
d applying The Slight
Personally, reading an
nths, attract
er 60 pounds in 24 mo
helped me ... lose ov
who are now my
hly successful people
relationships with hig
ows every day,
lf-confidence that gr
mentors, develop se
Edge has helped
Most of all, The Slight
and so much more.
few minutes a
d that investing just a
me clearly understan
affect. I now
has a compounding
day to improve my life
upward track to
owing that I am on the
get up every day kn
life ... and they
goals in all areas of my
achieving my dream
are massive!
llas, TX
—Jim Hageman, Da

I was in my second week of new program when I started
reading The Slight Edge. Up until then I had been inconsistent
in my workout routines and hadn’t stuck with any program for
more than a couple of weeks. They bore me. One night I went
to bed late and told myself that I’d just skip my workout in the
morning. The thought that went through my head was that
it’s
the easy choices I make each day that make the difference
in
my success. With that thought, I got up the next morning and
every morning after that. I’m now in the sixth week and I love
my morning workouts. I look forward to them. Since I’ve never
gotten this far, it is truly amazing how different I feel. I never
thought I would look forward to working out.

—Laura Jo Richins, Mesa, AZ

43

CHAPTER 3

Is Time on Your Side?

Time is free, but it’s priceless.
You can’t own it, but you can use it.
You can’t keep it but you can spend it.
Once you’ve lost it you can never get it back.
—Harvey Mackay

So you walk a little today, get your heart rate up a bit, you lift a few weights,
you eat a little differently, then tomorrow morning you wake up and look in the
mirror ... and see the same old flubber. You have to be pretty well along the
path to see any significant results. What keeps you doing this simple thing, day
after day?
Will power! It’s like my dad (mom, teacher, boss, older brother, minister, self)
always told me ... I just need more will power.
Really? I don’t think so. (A friend of mine used to say that people on diets
who complain that they lack will power are usually suffering more from a lack of
won’t power!) Will power is vastly overrated. For most people, will power ends
up looking and feeling like some sort of grim self-tyranny, and involves creating
an elaborate, artificial reward-and-punishment system.
Do you want to change? If so, I can show you how to tap into the most
powerful force for change there is. Would you like to know what it is? Are you
ready? Here it is:
TIME.

46

The Slight Edge

Position your daily actions so time is working
for instead of against you. Because time will either
promote you or expose you.
What keeps you on the path is your Slight Edge philosophy, which includes
your understanding of the secret of time. Knowing the secret of time, you say, If
I stay on this road long enough, I’ll get the result I seek. It’s not a question of your
mood or your feelings. And it’s not a question of will power. It’s a question of
simply knowing.
When you enter a darkened room, why does your hand reach out for the light
switch? Because you know that when you hit the switch, the light will go on. You
don’t have to give yourself positive self-talk about how you really ought to hit that
light switch, or set up a system of rewards and punishments for yourself around
whether you follow through or not with hitting the light switch. You don’t need
any rigmarole; you just hit the switch. Why? Because you know what will happen.
You know.
It’s the exact same thing here: you walk a little every day, lift a few weights,
eat a little better, and leave the penny in the purse (hit the light switch) because
you know it will make you healthy and wealthy (the light will turn on).
It’s the exact same thing, no different—except for one thing, and that is time.

“Instant Life”
If you were offered the same choice the wealthy man gave his sons, would
you choose the million dollars or the penny? Most people would make the second
boy’s choice: the right-now money—the quantum leap. After all, a million
dollars! In cash! Right now!
And, of course, you’d be making the wrong choice—and you would have
been fooled, as millions of people around the globe are fooled every minute of
every hour of every day, by those two seductive little words:
Right now!
I remember one day seeing a man standing in front of a microwave, fidgeting
impatiently as he peered through the window at his lunch being cooked, and
muttering, “Come onnnn ... come onnnn ... !”
It blew my mind. Sixty seconds wasn’t fast enough?!
It’s become a truism to say we live in a push-button, instant-access, fastfood kind of world where we want everything yesterday.
This doesn’t mean we have more impatient temperaments than our parents did.
It represents an entirely different way of thinking. An entirely different philosophy.

Is Time on Your Side? 47
There is a natural progression in life, which everyone knew intimately
back in the days when we were an agrarian society. You plant, then

you cultivate, and finally you harvest. Plant,
cultivate, harvest.
In today’s world, everyone wants to go directly
from plant to harvest. We plant the seed by joining the gym, and then get

frustrated when a few days go by and there’s no fitness harvest. Taking recreational
drugs is an effort to go from plant directly to harvest. So is taking steroids to enhance
athletic performance. So is robbing a bank; so is playing the lottery.
The step we keep overlooking (and overskipping!) is the step of cultivating.
And that, unlike planting and harvesting, takes place only through the patient
dimension of time.
Because we are a culture raised on television and movies, we’ve lost track of
time. We don’t understand time any more. I’m not criticizing television and films.
Film is an amazing art form, television is a powerful medium, and in the hands of
true artists, they can both teach us valuable lessons about life. Just not about time.
Through a great film, you can experience the triumph of the human soul over
adversity, the drama of a struggle between doing what’s right and succumbing
to the temptations of the world, a moving encounter between generations, the
flowering of a powerful romance, the struggle and birth of a nation ...
But it all has to be finished in two hours.
Can you imagine a nation being born in two hours? Meeting the person
who will become the love of your life—the dating, courtship, romance, struggle,
triumph, wedding and life thereafter—in two hours? Of course not. We expect
to put forth the effort of a short “training sequence” in a movie and get the same
heroic ending. In a world filled with instant coffee, instant breakfast, instant
credit, instant shopping, instant news and instant information, we have

come dangerously close to losing touch with reality
and believing we have access to instant life.
Where’s the Drama?

It’s not that becoming aware of the Slight Edge will make these critical
choices easier—because they’re already easy! And that, oddly enough, is the
challenge of it. This is not about making tough choices. It’s about making easy
choices consistently.
The problem is, making the wrong choices—the ones that will tilt the Slight
Edge to lean against you instead of in your favor—are also easy choices.

48

The Slight Edge
In a way, it would be a simpler matter if making the right choices were a big
deal. If it were a dramatic, huge, difficult thing. Why? Because then it would be
obvious. You wouldn’t need this book. The challenge is that making the right
choices is not dramatic. When the hero makes the right choice in a movie, it’s
dramatic, all right. Problem is, your life is not a movie. It’s real life.
Deciding whether or not to kill Darth Vader with your light saber is a dramatic
choice. Deciding whether or not to fasten your seat belt is an undramatic, boring,
mundane little choice that nobody will even witness. But guess which choice has the
power to take a few hundred thousand lives each year? Hint: it’s not the light saber.
If making the right Slight Edge choices were a dramatic thing, you’d get
immediate feedback. An entire movie theater audience applauding, cheering or
screaming. But that doesn’t happen. And that’s the big challenge of it: no immediate
feedback.
The right choices and wrong choices you make at the moment will have little
or no noticeable impact on how your day goes for you. Nor tomorrow, nor the
next day. No applause, no cheers, no screams, no life-or-death results played
out in Technicolor. But it is precisely those very same, undramatic, seemingly
insignificant actions that, when compounded over time, will dramatically affect
how your life turns out.
So, where’s the drama? It comes at the end of the story, when the credits start
to roll—which comes not in two hours but in two years. Or, depending on what
Slight Edge and what particular story we’re talking about, perhaps twelve years,
or twenty-two.
Making the right choices, taking the right actions. It’s truly easy to do.
Ridiculously easy. But it’s just as easy not to do. And if you don’t do them, there
won’t be any big drama about it. It won’t kill you; it won’t hurt you; in fact, it
won’t make any difference at all ...
Not today, anyway. Not tomorrow. But over time?

L
I
F
E

+
Simple Disciplines

TIME

_ Simple Er rors in Judgement

old
p.39

Is Time on Your Side? 49

The right choices you make today, compounded
over time, will take you higher and higher up the
success curve of this real-time movie called “your life.”
The wrong choices you make today, compounded over time, will absolutely,
positively and inevitably take you down and out.
Either way, there will be dramatic results, just like in a movie. Unlike a
movie, it will just take time before you see them.
Jerry Sanchez, of El Paso, Texas understands fully that making the right
choices daily can add up to good things:
After reading The Slight Edge, I decided to apply it to business (my
job). I didn’t do anything drastic, or make any major changes in my life. I
simply began to read 10 pages of a good book per day. I also started to think
before I made a decision. I would ask myself, Is this decision going to help
me or hurt me? It was the day-to-day decisions that transformed everything
in my life. After a year and a half of putting this in place, I got the position
I always wanted at work, and an increase of $12,000 a year.
I had worked for the company six years before putting the principles of
The Slight Edge in place. The greatest joy was when my boss called me into
his office, and said that I had changed over the last two years. I told him
that I didn’t notice, and he told me that everyone else had!

Making the Choice to Make the Choice
For twenty-one years, the wealthy man gave his sons everything he had,
including all his love, all his care and a magnificent place to live. But when they
turned twenty-one, he gave them the most valuable gift of all. He gave them
a choice.

That most valuable gift of all is a gift that you
always have. You always have a choice.

No matter what you have done in your life up until today, no matter where
you are and how far down you may have slid on the failure curve, you can start
fresh, building a positive pattern of success, at any time. Including right now.
But you need to have faith in the process, because you won’t see it happening
at first.
If you base your choices on the evidence, on what you can see, you’re sunk.
You need to base your choices on your philosophy—on what you know, not what
you see.

50

The Slight Edge
The Slight Edge is like Lady Justice, the famous blindfolded statue. The
statue itself, of the woman holding the scales and sword, has been around since
the days of ancient Rome. The blindfold was added in the sixteenth century,
in the years leading up to that era we call the “Enlightenment” that gave birth
to modern ideas of representative democracy and universal human rights. The
blindfold is not meant to signify that justice is “blind,” as people sometimes
assume, but that true justice is impervious to external influence.
That also makes it a very good representation of the Slight Edge.
If you want to understand and apply the Slight Edge to create the life of your
dreams, you can’t make your choices based on the evidence of your eyes. You
need to make them based on what you know. On your philosophy.
Picture success and failure as the two sides of a pair of balance scales, like the
one held by Lady Justice.
Let’s say you’re in a tough place in your life. The scales are tipped badly,
the negative side tilted way down. Whether it’s your health, or your finances,
or your marriage, or your career ... whatever it is, you’ve reached a place where
many years of simple errors in judgment have compounded over time, and
you’re feeling it. You’re behind the eight ball. It sure would be nice if, somehow,
you could do something dramatic. If you just wake up tomorrow and have it all
turned around—snap your fingers and change it.
That might happen, in a movie. But this is your life. What can you do?
What happens if you add one small, simple, positive action to the success
side? Nothing you can see. What happens if you add one more? Nothing you can
see. What happens if you keep adding one more, and one more, and one more,
and one more ...
Before too long, you see the scales shift, ever so slightly. And then again.
And eventually, that heavy “failure” side starts to lift, and lift, and lift ... and
the scales start swinging your way. No matter how much negative weight from
the past is on the other side, just by adding those little grams of success, one at a
time (and by not adding more weight to the failure side), you will eventually and
inevitably begin to shift the scales in your favor.
Way back in the beginning, when you add the first few morsels of positive
action, if you judge your choices by the evidence of your eyes, you won’t see the
scales move at all and that will frustrate you. It frustrates nineteen out of twenty
people so much, they quit. And that is the saddest thing I can think of.

Is Time on Your Side? 51

The Power of Compounding Effort
Picture a huge, heavy flywheel—a massive metal disk mounted
horizontally on an axle, about thirty feet in diameter, two feet thick, and
weighing about 5,000 pounds. Now imagine that your task is to get the
flywheel rotating on the axle as fast and for as long as possible.
Pushing with great effort, you get the flywheel to inch forward,
moving almost imperceptibly at first. You keep pushing and, after two
or three hours of persistent effort, you get the flywheel to complete one
entire turn.
You keep pushing, and the flywheel begins to move a bit faster, and
with continued great effort, you move it through a second rotation. You
keep pushing in a consistent direction. Three turns ... four ... five ... six
... the flywheel builds up speed ... seven ... eight ... you keep pushing ...
nine ... ten ... it builds momentum ... eleven ... twelve ... moving faster
with each turn ... twenty ... thirty ... fifty… a hundred.
Then at some point—breakthrough! The momentum of the thing
kicks in your favor, hurling the flywheel forward, turn after turn ...
whoosh! ... its own heavy weight working for you. You’re pushing no
harder than the first rotation, but the flywheel goes faster and faster.
Each turn of the flywheel builds upon work done earlier, compounding
your investment of effort. A thousand times faster, then ten thousand,
then a hundred thousand. The huge heavy disk flies forward with almost
unstoppable momentum.
Now suppose someone came along and asked, “What was the one
big push that caused this thing to go so fast?”
You wouldn’t be able to answer; it’s a nonsensical question. Was
it the first push? The second? The fifth? The hundredth? No! It was all
of them added together in an overall accumulation of effort applied in
a consistent direction. Some pushes may have been bigger than others,
but any single heave—no matter how large—reflects a small fraction of
the entire cumulative effect upon the flywheel.
— From Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap ... and
Others Don’t, by Jim Collins

Successful people do whatever it takes to get the job done, whether or
not they feel like it. They understand that it is not any one single push on the
flywheel, but the cumulative total of all their sequential, unfailingly consistent

52

The Slight Edge
pushes that eventually creates movement of such astonishing momentum in
their lives.

Successful people form habits that feed their
success, instead of habits that feed their failure. They

choose to have the Slight Edge working for them, not against them. They
build their own dreams, rather than spend their lives building other people’s
dreams, and they achieve these dramatic results in their lives through making
choices that are the very antithesis of drama—mundane, simple, seemingly
insignificant choices.
Every decision you make is a Slight Edge decision. What you’re going to do,
how you’re going to act, what you’re going to read, who you’re going to chat with
on the phone, what you’re going to eat for lunch, who you’re going to associate
with. How you’re going to treat your fellow workers. What you’re going to get
done today.
Simply by making those right decisions, or making more of them—one
at a time, over and over again—you will have enlisted the awesome power of
the Slight Edge on your behalf. The unwanted circumstances, the poor results
you’ve produced in the past, and the evidence of failures in your life, may all
continue for a time. There may be no light at the end of the tunnel, or at least
none you can see today. But by putting time on your side,

you’ve marshaled the forces of the Slight Edge. Your
success becomes inevitable. You just need to stay in
the process long enough to give it a chance to win.
It starts with a choice.
Cultivating Patience

Patience is a challenge for people who do not understand the Slight Edge.
Often, in the beginning, the success path can be uncomfortable, even scary.
Especially if you’re the only one around who’s on it. And with only one out of
twenty people ever achieving their goals, it’s quite likely that you will be the only
one around on the path—at least for a while.
Sometimes the path of success is inconvenient, and therefore easier not to
do. For most people, it’s easier to stay in bed. Getting on the path and staying
on the path requires faith in the process—especially at the start. That makes you
a pioneer.
Pioneers don’t know what’s out there, but out there, they go anyway. That’s
why being a pioneer takes such courage. Courage means to have a purpose and to

Is Time on Your Side? 53
have heart. Once you are aware of and understand how to use the Slight Edge,
you will naturally have both—purpose and the strength of heart to stay on
that purpose.

The important point is to start on the path and to
remember that no matter what has gone on before,
you can begin fresh and new and at any time you can
choose to start with a clean slate.
How long will it take? How long before you will actually see and feel (and
smell and touch and be able to spend and enjoy and appreciate) the results? How
long before you will have the experience of the success you’re seeking?
Obviously, it’s impossible for either of us to say exactly how long. But the
truth is, in three to five years, you can put virtually anything in your life onto
the right track. Think of what you were doing three years ago: it seems like
yesterday, doesn’t it? Well, three years from now, the things you’re doing right
now will seem like only yesterday, too. Yet this brief little period of time can
change your life.
How long will it take? Chances are it will take longer than you want it to ...
and when the time arrives, you’ll be astonished at how quick it seemed.
Patience is not an issue for the water hyacinth. It simply goes about its
business, calmly, quietly doubling, until it covers the pond. You can do the same.

Serene, I fold my hands and wait,
Nor care for wind, nor tide, nor sea;
I rave no more ’gainst time or fate,
For lo! my own shall come to me.
—John Burroughs, Waiting

The Slight Edge guarantees that your own shall come to you, like the water
hyacinth covering the pond. The way your own shows up, good or bad, failure
or success, win or lose, is, moment by moment, up to you. You need not “care for
wind, or tide, or sea ...”—but you do need to care for those simple little actions
which, compounded over time, will make the difference between your success
or failure.
The problem is that most of us live with one foot planted firmly in the past
and the other tucked timidly in the future—never in the moment. In relation
to everything—our kids, our health, our home, our career—we tick through the
hours in constant regret and Monday-morning-quarterbacking about what’s
behind us, and with worry, anxiety and dread about what lies ahead.

54

The Slight Edge

The Slight Edge is all about living in the moment.
For me personally, it is perhaps the hardest lesson to
learn about the Slight Edge: you can’t find it in the
past or the future, only right here, right now.
The reason Ekhart Tolle’s modest little 1997 book on enlightenment, The
Power of Now, took the marketplace by storm, selling over two million copies
in thirty languages, is that his core message is one that everyone knows they
need to hear: your life exists only in the moment. But you can’t really absorb or
live that truth through reading a book; you absorb and live that truth simply
by being fully in the process of living your life—not regretting the past, not
dreading the future.
The Slight Edge is about your awareness. It is about you making the right
choices, the choices that serve you and empower you, starting right now and
continuing for the rest of your life, and learning to make them effortlessly.
This book is about putting the Slight Edge to work for you, instead of
against you.
It’s easy to do. And it’s easy not to do. And if you don’t do it, it won’t kill
you or destroy your chances for success today. But that simple error in judgment,
compounded over time, will kill your chances for success. It will take you down
and out of your life forever. And that choice is always yours.
The choice of simple things, and the wisdom to make that choice. The
wealthy man was right: the third gift is one that you can only claim; it’s something
nobody can give you.
It’s also something no one can take away from you.

Key Points of Chapter 3
The most powerful force for change is time. Position your daily actions so time
is working for instead of against you. Because time will either promote you or expose
you. What keeps you on the path is your Slight Edge philosophy which includes your
understanding of the secret of time. Knowing that if I stay on this path long enough
I will get the results I want.
In today’s world, everyone wants to go directly from plant to harvest. The
step we keep overlooking is the step of cultivating. And that, unlike planting and
harvesting, takes place only through the patient dimension of time. The right choices
you make today, compounded over time, will take you higher up the success curve.

Is Time on Your Side? 55

Success Is Not a Race, It’s a Journey
opportunity
For many years I wanted to be my own boss, and when the
a few years
after
nately,
Unfortu
s.
busines
first
presented itself I started my
alizing
demor
pretty
a
was
It
ing.
everyth
lost
I
and
failed
s
the busines
experience and one that I liked to deny responsibility for. Shortly
my eyes
afterwards I was given a audio copy of The Slight Edge and
overnight,
failed
had
s
busines
my
like
d
seeme
it
h
were opened. Althoug
from the
further
when I really thought about it nothing could have been
, and
reverse
in
Edge
Slight
the
g
truth. For a long time I had been applyin
ating.
devast
is
out,
found
I
as
that,
of
the cumulative effect
Edge
I’m happy to say that since then I have been applying Slight
(no
principles in the correct manner, and although it has taken awhile
in a
forward
moving
now
are
things
one said it would be easy, did they?)
first
my
and
family,
lovely
a
wife,
ul
beautif
a
have
I
n.
very positive directio
d
planne
12
of
children’s book is being published this month, with a series
bright,
ely
extrem
looks
family
over the next two years. The future for our
consistent
and I know from the bottom of my heart that this is down to
Edge.
Slight
the
of
tion
applica
™
—Mark Hibbitts, Author of Alfie Potts the
Schoolboy Entrepreneur

I grew up in a middle class family where I was taught to go to
school,
get good grades and get a good job. Unfortunately my plan
was
derailed by some family medical circumstances that I could
not
control. At the age of 21 I found myself making $4.25 per hour
working six days a week pursuing the philosophies of my parent
s.
The Slight Edge opened my mind to new horizons as I realized
my
past did not have to equal my future. I now knew that with a
slight
change in activity and consistency it was only a matter of time
before I reached my true destiny. With these changes I create
d
a six-figure income by the age of 30 and today I am a milliona
ire
with five wonderful children and a beautiful wife to spend the
rest
of my life with. No matter what circumstances you find yoursel
f in,
by applying the Slight Edge principles over time you can positive
ly
change the trajectory of your life.

—Dave Hall, Highland, UT

CHAPTER 4

You Have to Start with a Penny

A journey of a thousand miles begins with a small step.
— Lao Tzu

I’ve presented the story of the penny doubled every day to hundreds and
hundreds of audiences, and often I hear a comment like this:
Wow, that’s amazing ... to think that you could start with nothing and build
a fortune!
That’s not quite accurate: you don’t start with nothing. You

start with a penny.

No big deal, I mean, of course, you start with a penny, but, you know, it’s
basically starting with nothing.
No, it’s not: it’s starting with a penny. It may seem like an insignificant
difference (although you’re probably starting to have a little bit different view of
the word “insignificant”). The truth is, it makes all the difference.
To accomplish anything worth accomplishing, to create success, to achieve
your dreams, you don’t have to do impossible, extraordinary, superhuman
things. But you have to do something. You have to start with a penny.
Success doesn’t come from nowhere; it can’t be conjured up out of thin air. It
comes from a very small, tiny beginning—but there has to be a beginning. That
beginning is the thing people miss, the thing they don’t see. And they don’t see it
because it’s so tiny, it’s almost invisible.

58

The Slight Edge
Some of the largest companies in the world started out as nothing. Take
Facebook, for example. Mark Zuckerberg started with just a concept—a
penny—in his small Harvard dorm room, and today it has become the largest
social networking site on the Internet, with over half a billion users. But in the
beginning stages, when it was just a penny, Mark Zuckerberg believed in it
enough to continue to take consistent action in building his vision, no matter if
people believed in his penny or not.
A dead-broke, struggling young English teacher named Steve had started
writing a story about a troubled high-school girl. Within a handful of pages, he
realized the story wasn’t working out and tossed the pages in the trash. Why add
yet one more to his large and growing stack of rejection notices?
The next day, as Steve’s wife was doing some straightening up, she bent
down to empty his trash basket and happened to notice the curled little sheaf of
papers. She straightened them out, dusted off the cigarette ashes, read them and
took them to Steve: she thought he maybe had something worth finishing.
She was right. He did finish it, and the paperback rights sold for nearly a
half a million dollars. What’s more, his story of the troubled school girl named
Carrie launched Stephen King’s career: he became the most successful writer in
the twentieth century.
What Tabitha King recognized in the trash may have been a tarnished
penny, but still, it was a penny.
One chilly day in December 1955, an unknown forty-two-year-old
seamstress in Montgomery, Alabama, decided she’d had enough. She was tired
after a long day’s work. Most of all, she was tired of being treated the way she
was—and tired of every other person of her color being treated that way, too. So
when she was told to give up her bus seat to a white passenger, she refused—even
when the bus driver threatened her with arrest.
It was no idle threat; she was arrested, then convicted and fined for violating
a city ordinance. Her case was the catalyst for the formation of a new civil rights
organization. On the same day of the woman’s hearing, the newly formed
Montgomery Improvement Association elected a young and relatively unknown
minister named Martin Luther King Jr. to be its spokesperson, launching a
movement that over the next decade abolished legal segregation and radically
transformed the face of the nation.
Rosa Parks was a penny.

You Have to Start with a Penny 59
The Slight Edge reader James Paris of Daytona Beach, Florida, knows the
power of the penny.
Six years ago I learned that my accountant had embezzled $2 million
from our company. I ended up in bankruptcy and languished in depression
for five years. About six months ago I purchased The Slight Edge and I
was able to find the motivation to just take a small step every day toward
rebuilding my life.
Now I am back on TV and radio and writing again. I have rebuilt
my website ChristianMoney.com and have had multiple financial
breakthroughs. I realized that I could not change my past but that I could
rebuild a new future by taking just a small step every day in the right
direction, just like the power of the penny. In just a few months I am well
on the way to regaining the success I had prior to losing everything.
Let’s do one more bit of time travel. There was a time, a certain number of
years ago, when a tiny blob of gelatin began to pulse with hidden potential. It
was barely more than a speck of matter, about the thickness of a dollar bill, at the
very threshold of human sight: any smaller and it would have been invisible to
the naked eye.
Though tiny, this insignificant little dot of matter (you could have fit about
twenty of them on the head of a pin) contained chemical instructions that, if
printed out, would have filled more than 500,000 pages; in fact, it was among the
most organized, complex structures in the universe. Over the next nine months
of Slight Edge compounding, this little blob of gelatin would blossom into over
thirty trillion cells before being born into the open air ... and letting out a wail as
it took its first breath.
It would become you.
You started as a penny.

A Penny for Your Thoughts ...
Now imagine that instead of a penny doubling every day, it’s your health
that you’re increasing by one penny’s worth ... and then by two pennies, and
then four.
If you could come up with something that would make you feel one penny’s
worth better, could you do that every day? Of course. A little moderate exercise,
a brisk one-mile walk, a quarter of an hour on a treadmill, not going that fast. Get
your heart rate up slightly, no big deal.
And your reward? When you get up the next morning, do you feel better?

60

The Slight Edge
Not really. I mean, not noticeably. Maybe just a little ... say, a penny’s worth.
Hardly seems worth the effort. And after a week, you’re feeling sixty-four cents’
worth better. Big deal! You’ve had to put up with some rainy weather, walk
through a few stiff muscles, and miss your favorite news program ... hey, it’s
really not worth it.
But what if you kept doing it anyway? Would you eventually feel like a
million bucks? No—you’d feel like ten million.
But you need to start with the penny.
Now imagine that penny is your knowledge.
If I told you that reading Napoleon Hill’s Think and Grow Rich would change
your life, would you sit down and read it, cover to cover, today? Mind you, that’s
a 256-page book, and those aren’t lightweight pages. Or another classic, Stephen
Covey’s The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. That’s a 358-pager, and it’s not
easy reading.
Would you read either one in a single day? I doubt it. I wouldn’t—I can’t
spend the entire day reading, and I’ll bet you can’t either.
But could you read a penny’s worth—say, ten pages? (Actually, at current
used-book prices on amazon.com, ten pages of the Hill book would cost about
fifty cents, and ten pages of the Covey book would run about ten cents—but I’m
using the penny here as a metaphor!) I don’t know how much you would get out
of ten pages; maybe a lot, maybe nothing. Let’s say you get nothing. But if you
could read ten pages today, could you read ten more tomorrow? Of course you
could—anyone who can read could do that.
And if you do that, and you keep it up every day for a year, you will have read
about a dozen brilliant, life-transforming classics. Your mind will be filled with
the strategies and know-how to create a startling new level of success. You will
have thoughts of millionaires—all from a penny.
But you need to start with the penny.

Let’s Get Real
“Okay, doubling a penny in a story is all very well. But I don’t see anyone
offering to double my money every day for a month, not in real life. Besides, even
if I could get compound interest on a money account, how am I supposed to add
up compound interest in health, or relationships, or knowledge?”
Fair enough. Let’s change the question. Forget about doubling for a minute,
and let’s forget about compound interest, too, for the moment. Let’s just add
a penny every day, not double the penny. Do you think you could improve

You Have to Start with a Penny 61
yourself—your health, your knowledge, your skills, your diet, your relationships,
whatever area of life you want to look at—just one percent?
Wait—before you answer that, let’s make it even smaller. What if you were
able to improve yourself, today, just three-tenths of one percent? That’s a 0.003
improvement—a very Slight Edge indeed. So slight, in fact, you might have a
hard time even knowing how to measure it.
Now, what if you did that again tomorrow, and the next day, and kept it up every
day for the next year? Remember, you’re not going to add up compound interest
this time, you’re just adding on another three-tenths of one percent each day.
Here’s what will happen. The first day you’ll improve by 0.003, so little it
will probably be impossible to notice. The second day, your improvement will be
0.006; the next day, 0.009, almost a full one percent. And by the end of the year,
you will have improved by one hundred percent.
Doubled.
You will be twice what you are today—twice as fit, twice as wealthy, twice
as skilled, twice as happy ... twice as whatever it is you’ve been working on, in
whatever areas you apply your daily three-tenths-percent
effort. Twice the you, in just one year!
If you give yourself a year to do it, you can become twice the person you
are today. Imagine having twice the net worth, twice the personal relationships,
twice the health. Making twice the positive impact on the world. Having twice as
much fun and enjoying twice the quality of life.
How could you possibly accomplish this? By trying twice as hard? Working
twice as many hours? Have double the positive attitude? No—by improving
three-tenths of one percent at a time.
Every day, in every moment, you get to exercise choices that will determine
whether or not you will become a great person, living a great life. Greatness is
not something predetermined, predestined or carved into your fate by forces
beyond your control. Greatness is always in the moment of
the decision.
But you have to start with a penny. And that’s the great and tragic irony of
it, the sad and terrible tale of the ninety-five percent: that little penny seems so
insignificant, so small, so silly ... why even bother to bend over and pick it up?
After all ...
Can you imagine walking into your bank to deposit a single penny into a
savings account? Can you imagine looking in your savings account, deposit box
or piggy bank, and finding a balance of $0.01? It might as well be a balance of

62

The Slight Edge
zero, right? How much difference is there, right? I mean, we’re talking about one
penny! What could you buy with a penny?

Key Points of Chapter 4
To accomplish anything worth accomplishing, to create success, to achieve your
dreams, you don’t have to do impossible, extraordinary, superhuman things. But you
have to do something. You have to start with a penny. Do you think you could improve
yourself—your health, your knowledge, your skills, your diet, your relationships,
whatever area of life you want to look at—just one percent?

The Power of the Penny
Read how these The Slight Edge readers started with a penny and ended up
accomplishing amazing things.
He
r narcotics officer in Chicago.
My husband was an undercove
This
i.
sem
a
by
hit
was
k when he
had a horrible accident at wor
lost a
in artery to his heart burst, he
ma
The
39.
at
eer
car
ended his
ks and
wee
six
d, he was in a coma for
lung, liver and his kidneys faile
r, in a
yea
a
r
afte
e
hom
port. He came
spent seven months on life sup
me
put
God
t
tha
ney
jour
a
an
re beg
wheelchair and on oxygen. The
y
bilit
disa
his
for
no income as we waited
on. The following year we had
s
ear
our
to
up
e
wer
rly lost our home and
hearings to complete. We nea
we
as
e
Edg
t
Sligh
the
g
livin
e
. We wer
in debt to everyone, everywhere
for
omplishments, like just standing
acc
ll
sma
ugh
thro
way
our
worked
for
gen
oxy
out
with
on a calendar, going
three seconds and noting this
ch
whi
,
very
reco
us
culo
mira
l he made a
a minute, noting that, etc., unti
and
e
amazed at. This is the Slight Edg
even his doctors and nurses are
at its best.
ny
pen
the power of starting with a

—Lynn Lionhood, Orland Park,

IL

My daughter had health complications a few years back, which
left
her on six or seven different medications. These of course create
d
severe weight gain. After reading The Slight Edge, I suggested
that she
ride her stationary bike every day to help her drop some weight
. At
first she could only do 3 minutes, then 5 then 8 and so on. Eventu
ally
she progressed up to 20 minutes. After a year, it seemed like,
all
of a sudden, my daughter lost 25 pounds and we are all in shock,
wondering what is happening. It took me a moment, but then
I realized
it was the power of the Slight Edge, 15 minutes a day.

—Valerie Thomas, Yeadon, PA

You Have to Start with a Penny 63
After suffering a stroke, Al Lewis of Illinois looked to lessons he learned from
The Slight Edge to prove his doctor’s initial diagnosis that he would probably
never walk again wrong. When Al started his recovery process he could barely
move and had lost the ability to speak. He knew if he wanted to get back to the
life he enjoyed before the stroke he would have to stay focused on improving a
tiny bit each day, and not get bogged down in his current circumstances. Here is
an excerpt from what Al Lewis shared with The Loyola Living Medical Journal,
where he was featured for his impressive recovery.
The Slight Edge taught me that if you do a little bit each day, a little
bit, a little bit, you can make progress, great progress. I applied that
philosophy to my rehabilitation. I started moving my fingers, a little
bit. Then my hand, and then my arm a little bit. Now I go bike riding
and I spend 30 minutes on an elliptical trainer. It all starts with just a
little bit. Now my doctors tell me that although half of patients with
my kind of stroke don’t survive, when they look at me they can’t
event tell I have had a stroke. I had faith throughout the entire
rehabilitation process that if I could just improve .003 percent each
day compounded over time, I would make a full recovery.

Today Al has made a full recovery, including walking and talking, and has
been able to return to his passions of playing music and speaking to audiences.
Al serves as a shining example for all of us to look past our current circumstances
and to focus on where we want to go by improving little by little.

CHAPTER 5

The Quantum Leap Myth

Some Day ...
Some day, when my ship comes in ...
Some day, when I have the money ...
Some day, when I have the time ...
Some day, when I have the skill, the confidence ...
How many of those statements have you said to yourself? Have I got
some shocking news for you: “some day” doesn’t
exist, never has, and never will. There is no “some
day.” There’s only today. When tomorrow comes, it will be another
today; so will the next day. They all will. There is never anything but today.
And some more shocking news: your ship’s not coming—it’s already here.
Docked and waiting. You already have the money. You already have the time. You
already have the skill, the confidence. You already have everything you need to
achieve everything you want.
You just can’t see it.
Why not? Because you’re looking in the wrong place. You’re looking for the
breakthrough, the quantum leap. You’re looking for the winning

lottery ticket in a game that isn’t a lottery!

Have you ever noticed that when you read stories about lottery winners,
they are hardly ever bank presidents, successful entrepreneurs or corporate
executives? That they never seem to be people who were already financially

66

The Slight Edge
successful before they bought that winning ticket? Have you ever wondered
why? It’s because successful people never win the lottery. Why not? Because they
don’t buy lottery tickets.
Successful people have already grasped the truth that lottery players have
not: life is not a lottery. Success is not a random accident.

Greek Gods and Real Heroes
In ancient Greek theater, characters generally got themselves into as much of a
mess as the playwright could possibly dream up. Everything would be headed for
an absolutely impossible disaster when (in the last few minutes of the play) an actor
playing a “god” would come floating down from the sky to make everything right—
banishing this character and reinstating that one, punishing another and granting
divine clemency to still another, explaining the inexplicable and solving the insoluble.
Things would be in such a mess, there’d be no way a human being could sort
the stuff out. Obviously, it would have to take a being with divine powers. And just
like in a stage production of Peter Pan, the actor would be suspended by ropes and a
system of pulleys, a mechanical contrivance they termed a “machine,” or machina.
Today, thousands of years later, people still refer to a last-minute “cheat”
solution for an impossible problem coming out of thin air as a deus ex machina, or
“god dropping in out of nowhere by a machine”—the supernatural, breakthrough
force that pops in just to make all things right. And by the way, when critics say a
play, novel or film uses a “deus ex machina,” it’s not a compliment! It’s their way
of saying, “Oh yeah, right. Couldn’t come up with a real solution, huh, so you
had to trot in a deus ex machina? Gimme a break!”
And that is just what it is people are hoping for: a break. The big break. The
lucky break. The breakthrough. A break in the routine ... a break with reality. A
deus ex machina. But that’s not how things really work.
Okay, then, how do things really work?
Look at some of the real-world problems that would have made Athena or
Apollo or any other deity of Greek drama pull their hair out.
William Wilberforce spent his entire career introducing bill after bill to his
colleagues in the British Parliament in his efforts to end slavery, only to have
them defeated one after the other. From 1788 to 1806, he introduced a new antislavery motion and watched it fail every single year for eighteen years in a row.
Finally, three days before Wilberforce’s death in 1833, Parliament passed a bill
to abolish slavery not only in England but also throughout its colonies. Three
decades later, a similar bill would pass in the United States (spearheaded by

The Quantum Leap Myth 67
another man of conscience who had also spent much of his life failing): Abraham
Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation.
Deus ex machina? Far from it. These were human problems, and they had
human solutions. But the only access to them is through the Slight Edge.
Of course, Wilberforce and Lincoln were not the sole figures in this heroic
struggle, and even after their bills were passed into law on both sides of the
Atlantic, the evils of slavery and racism were far from over. But their efforts—
like Mother Teresa’s efforts to end poverty, Gandhi’s to end colonial oppression,
or Martin Luther King’s and Nelson Mandela’s to end racism—are classic
examples of what “breakthrough” looks like in the real world.
All of these real-life heroes understood the Slight Edge. None of them were
hypnotized by the allure of the “big break.” If they had been, they would never had
continued taking the actions they took—and what would the world look like today?

One Small Step...
Our cultural mythology, the philosophy our society subscribes to as a group,
worships the breakthrough even when we don’t realize that’s what we’re doing.
“One small step for a man ... ”—nonsense! That wasn’t one small step—the
guy was on the moon! That was one gigantic step for man, a genuine breakthrough.
The small step was when some guy—someone you and I never heard of—
first started tinkering with design ideas for how a rocket ship might withstand the
intense conditions of space flight. There were thousands, hundreds of thousands,
millions of “one small steps” for years and years beforehand that all went into that
epic 1969 leap of Neil Armstrong’s that was televised throughout the world (and
is still played over and over in our culture as one of the most deeply ingrained
news bites of history).
But we don’t celebrate any of those real “small steps.” We don’t even know
what they are, or who made them.
The myth of our culture is the giant step, the larger-than life leap, the heroic
effort. “Faster than a speeding bullet, able to ... ” Wait, how does that go again? Is
it, “able to take small, insignificant, incremental steps, consistently, over time?”
No, it’s “able to leap tall buildings in a single bound!” I mean, what kind of
Superman would take tiny steps?
The kind who wins. Like Edison and his light bulb.
There’s a popular expression these days, “Luck is preparedness meeting
opportunity.” It’s a nifty little saying, and it’s close, but in my experience, it
isn’t quite accurate. Luck is preparedness—period! Preparedness through doing

68

The Slight Edge
those simple, little, constructive, positive actions, over and over. Luck is

preparedness that eventually creates opportunity!

That’s the truth of big breaks, lucky breaks and breakthroughs: they do
happen—just not out of thin air.
Have you ever suddenly understood something in a “flash of recognition”?
Have you ever known of someone who became an “overnight success”? Here is
a secret: both that “sudden flash” and that “overnight success” were the final,
breakthrough results of a lengthy process of edge upon edge upon edge. You may
completely and absolutely trust in the truth that it is always the little things, done
consistently over time, which bring about the “breakthroughs” that you see.

No success is immediate. Nor is any failure
instantaneous. They are both products of the
Slight Edge.

The truth of quantum leaps is that they are not larger than life: they’re
submicroscopic. The actual term “quantum leap” comes from particle physics,
where it does not refer to a huge, epic jump. It refers to the fact that energy, after
a period of time, will suddenly appear at another level, without our having been
able to observe how it got there.
It is an exact description of how the water hyacinth moves from day twentynine to day thirty. An exact description of how the frog’s certain death by
drowning was suddenly transformed into salvation by butter.
A real-life quantum leap is not Superman leaping a tall building. A real
quantum leap is Edison perfecting the electric light bulb—and transforming the
world with it.

The “Magic Bullet”
Every single January in every gym in America, hundreds of thousands
of people start over in a process that they will soon quit—only because they
haven’t set themselves up with the right expectation. They aren’t looking for
incremental progress; they’re looking for results they can feel. They’re looking
for a breakthrough. They never had a chance.
Easy to do, easy not to do ... and in that tiny, seemingly insignificant little
choice not to do, so many people needlessly live out lives of quiet desperation.

Believing in the “big break” is worse than simply
being futile. It’s actually dangerous, because it can
keep you from taking the actions you need to take to

The Quantum Leap Myth 69

One Quality Story at a Time
My good friend Mark Victor Hansen and Jack Canfield, co-authors of
the blockbuster Chicken Soup for the Soul series of books, understood
that long-term success is built not only on being prepared, but by
offering a quality product that people will continue to buy for years
and years to come.
I remember sitting with Hansen when he and Canfield had a vision for
a book concept that had never been done before. As speakers, they
were known for their motivational stories and quotes they would weave
into their speeches. Fans loved their stories so much they inquired if
they could put these stories and quotes into a book. Instead of using
their own stories, they reached out to fans and others to submit stories
of people doing extraordinary things. All they had to do was carefully
edit and compile them into topics that people would want to read.
Once they had one title down, their plan would be to do other titles
based on the same format.
I have to admit, I wasn’t too sure that was a very good idea. In fact, I
told Hansen he had a 50/50 chance of success. I didn’t know if people
would want to read a collection of stories written by everyday people.
But they had a clear vision of what they wanted to do, how they were
going to do it and how they were going to get there. It wouldn’t be a
slap-it-together-and-shove-it-out-the-door kind of project. They knew
it would take time to get the right stories, and a lot of work went into
evaluating each and every story they put in—101 to be exact in their
first book. They also knew the name of the book would be key, for they
wanted the stories to have a healing effect, much like the chicken
soup Canfield’s mother would give him as a child. The name stuck.
When it was released in 1993, the media didn’t pay much attention
or have much use for it. But word-of-mouth spread like wildfire and
many people were buying several copies at a time to give to family
and friends.
By September of 1994 Chicken Soup for the Soul was on every bestseller list in the U.S. and Canada. Over the next ten years, Chicken
Soup for the Soul branded merchandise reached over $2 billion in
retail sales. As of this printing, over 112 million books—not to mention
CD and DVD collections and many other products—have been sold in
over 200 titles and 40 languages.
Hansen and Canfield weren’t looking for a quantum leap to success.
They knew that one quality story at a time would eventually get them
to where they wanted to be.

70

The Slight Edge

create the results you want. It can even be lethal. Think of the poor
frog that gave up and let himself drown because he couldn’t see a breakthrough on
the horizon. He was wrong, of course: there are miracles, even in the life of a frog.
It’s just that the breakthrough didn’t come down out of the clouds; it came at the
end of a series of consistent, determined, compounding-interest foot-paddlings.
What’s the greatest gift you can give to an inner-city kid? An understanding of
the Slight Edge. Because that’s not the answer he’s getting from the world around
him. He believes that the only way out of his world of poverty, violence, oppression
and fear is to become a sports superstar—because that’s what we tell him. That’s
the quantum leap answer. The truth, of course, is that very, very few individuals
will have the talent to break out of that world by becoming sports superstars. And
deep down, every one of these kids knows that, or soon finds out ... so they give
up. Why bother? And they become victims of the Quantum Leap Myth. Can you
imagine if every first grader was required to start reading 10 pages of a good book
a day? How would their finances, their health, their relationships change as adults?

Slight Edge for Teens: Making a Difference
A few years ago we partnered with the SUCCESS Foundation to
write SUCCESS for Teens: Real Teens Talk About Living the Slight
Edge. It’s a wonderful book that skillfully illustrates the importance
to young kids of clarifying their goals, while practicing the small
efforts necessary for success, and accepting responsibility for
one’s own destiny. Organized in an easy-to-read format and
sprinkled with engaging exercises, action steps and stories from
real teens, SUCCESS for Teens helps teens embrace eight principles that
will allow them to shape the futures that they want.
For more information, log on to www.successfoundation.org. The SUCCESS
Foundation, along with its partnering organizations Big Brothers Big Sisters,
Boys & Girls Clubs, Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship, Just Say Yes,
America’s Promise Alliance and Optimist International, are committed to
distributing worldwide more than 10 million SUCCESS for Teens books and
audios to instill the Slight Edge philosophy in today’s youth.

Crisis of Poor Health
Over the last several decades, it’s been amazing to me how many people I’ve
been close to have persisted in making fun of my dietary choices, exercise habits
and personal development goals. The “insignificant” little things I’ve been doing

The Quantum Leap Myth 71
every day for years have always struck them as funny, because they couldn’t see
the point. They couldn’t see the results coming further on down the path.
Today I see these friends and ache for them: many now have failing health,
are languishing in poor financial conditions and seem to have lost their hopes
for the future. What they have a hard time seeing is that my good health isn’t
an accident, and their poor health isn’t a stroke of bad luck. We’ve all gotten to
where we are today the exact same way: the Slight Edge. They are victims of the
Quantum Leap Myth.
Our society is sliding rapidly into an ever-increasing economic crisis of poor
health including an epidemic of adult onset diabetes, heart disease, obesity and
a score of other chronic illnesses that have steadily fed a monstrously overgrown
health care system, tax system and social security system—and there isn’t a
single “cause” anywhere in sight. As I’m writing this, several of our most widely
used over-the-counter drugs have suddenly been found to make things worse.
There is no mystery for those who know how to recognize the Slight Edge at
work. Our entire health crisis is nothing but one set of little decisions, made daily
and compounded daily, winning out over another set of little decisions, made
daily and compounded daily.
We look for the cure, the breakthrough, the magic pill—the medicalscientific quantum leap miracle our press has dubbed the “magic bullet.” But
the solution already exists. It always did. Is it magic? Yes—the same magic that
caused the problem: the power of daily actions, compounded over time. The
magic of the Slight Edge.
There’s a great line in the movie Bruce Almighty, when God (played by
Morgan Freeman) is leaving the all-too-human Jim Carrey character to solve
things on his own (and refusing to be a deus ex machina). He says, “You
want a miracle? Be the miracle.” Once you absorb the Slight
Edge way of being, you’ll stop looking for that quantum leap—and start building
it. You too can become the miracle.

The Winning Edge
The Slight Edge is the process every winner has used to succeed since the
dawn of time. Winning is always a matter of the Slight Edge.
One of the most highly anticipated events at the Summer Olympics is
men’s swimming. Going into the 2008 Beijing Games there was a lot of hype
surrounding Michael Phelps, who would be gunning for Mark Spitz’s 36-yearold record of seven gold medals. The first seven medals came rather easily, but

72

The Slight Edge
his eighth medal was one for the ages: the 100 meter Butterfly. When he came
down the final stretch, it looked like he was going to fall just inches short. After
touching the wall, the world was stunned when the clock showed Michael had
edged out Milorad Cavic by 1/100 of a second. Yes, that’s a very slight edge. But
it’s all he needed to secure a record eighth gold medal, perhaps becoming the
greatest Olympic athlete ever. What if he had lost by 1/100 of a second, would
we be calling him the greatest Olympic athlete ever? Probably not.
Do you know what makes the difference between a .300-hitting baseball
star with a multimillion-dollar contract and a .260-plus player making only
an average salary? Less than one additional hit per week over the course of the
season. And you know what makes the difference between getting that hit and
striking out? About one quarter-inch up or down the bat.
No golf fan will ever forget the Master’s tournament where Phil Mickelson
was left with a twenty-foot putt on the eighteenth hole of the final round. Miss it,
even by one inch, and he would head into a playoff with the number two player
in the world, Ernie Els. Make it, and he would finally silence the critics and win
his first major. The putt rolled in and Mickelson had his green jacket.
Over the course of the tournament’s four days, Mickelson shot a 279, six
strokes better than his competitor. The difference? One and one half strokes per
day better. The Slight Edge.
And it’s not just in sports. It’s in everything.
In 1998, a book called The Millionaire Next Door, by Thomas J. Stanley and
William D. Danko, became a runaway best-seller. What so amazed readers was
the fact the people profiled in the book were incredibly ordinary, everyday sorts of
folks, with normal and even mediocre-level jobs, who had created extraordinary
wealth by a truly remarkable, unexpected, amazing strategy. It consisted of—
you guessed it—doing little, mundane, ordinary, insignificant, everyday things
with their money.
If you had followed any of those people around for the twenty or thirty or
forty years during which they were amassing their financial empires, I promise
you, it would not have been breathtakingly exciting—no more exciting than it
would be to follow an Olympic athlete in training every day from his 3:30 A.M.
wake-up call to his exhausted collapse into bed at night.
We love rags-to-riches stories and underdog-becomes-hero stories, and
we use them to motivate people because they are so exciting and dramatic ...
aren’t they?
Actually, no. The truth is, they’re not exciting at all—when they’re really

The Quantum Leap Myth 73
happening. They only seem dramatic in the retelling. But the reality is that the
rags-to-riches success story person has gotten to where he is by making mundane,
quiet, little Slight Edge decisions and repeating simple disciplines, day in and
day out.
It’s not exciting to read about; it’s not exciting to make a movie about. It’s
not even exciting to do. But believe me, it sure is exciting when you finally get to
experience the results.
No matter in what arena in life or work or play—the difference between
winning and losing, the gap that separates success and failure, is so slight, so
subtle, most never see it.
Superman may leap tall buildings at a single bound. Here on earth, we win
through the Slight Edge.

Key Points of Chapter 5
We look for the cure, the breakthrough, the magic pill—the medical-scientific
quantum leap miracle our press has dubbed the “magic bullet.” But the solution
already exists. It always did. Is it magic? Yes—the same magic that caused the
problem: the power of daily actions, compounded over time. The magic of the
Slight Edge.

74

The Slight Edge

did not have a lot of
enth of eight kids. We
I grew up as the sev
e degree but I had big
lleg
family had a co
my
in
lity
dy
bo
No
y.
ne
mo
them become a rea
! How would I make
me
g
win
sho
ul
ssf
ce
dreams for my future
wealthy and suc
the
of
s
ge
n
nta
ca
va
eri
ad
Am
ly live the
without the
rt with nothing and tru
sta
I
uld
,
co
ne
w
Mi
Ho
ld
y?
Go
xt
the wa
ing the ne
ve was always pursu
Dream? A close relati
“next big thing.” I
the
ll,
we
oil
”
discovered
investing in the “just
s?”
am
y to pursue my dre
thought, “Is this the wa
rted channeling the
ge principles and sta
Ed
ht
Slig
dI
the
red
ve
I disco
rrect daily habits an
for success into the co
me
lp
he
uld
wo
t
burning desire I had
tha
ntum
I would build mome
s my
ard
tow
g
rkin
knew that over time,
wo
y
ntl
knew that by consiste
a
to reach my goals. I
my dreams become
attitude, I would see
ve
,
siti
rld
po
a
wo
h
the
wit
l
ve
als
go
ge to tra
ht! I›ve had the privile
use
ca
be
all
of—
reality! Boy, was I rig
ed
am
s I›ve never dre
ng
thi
do
ily,
ing
fam
rsu
at
pu
is
raise a gre
relative still
fortunately, my close
of these principles! Un
the “next big thing.”

­—Dennis Windsor
e!
Author, Financially Fre

After reading The Slight Edge I realized how I ended up where
I was
in life. I was like a ship without a rudder, a wandering genera
lity.
I have always known I wanted to be successful, however, I never
realized that it was not that big chance or huge deal that was
going
to do it. I finally understood it was the day to day events that
I did or
did not decide to do that made the true difference in my life.
As I sat
and looked at my life I finally got the picture. From that day
forward
I started to apply the Slight Edge to everything I was doing from
business to relationships. Although it was hard at first, once I
got used
to doing the little things everyday it made all the difference
in the
world. I now have a wonderful woman in my life, a thriving busines
s
and time to reflect on what is most important to me.

—Adam Russell, Miami FL
Principal / CEO Global Resource Broker LLC

CHAPTER 6

The 7 Slight Edge Principles

By now you have learned what the Slight Edge is all about—how it can work
for you or against you. You have also read about the importance of doing the little
things every day that don’t seem like a big deal but are a big deal—seemingly
insignificant tasks done daily that add up to success.
You have also learned how I have implemented the Slight Edge philosophy into
my life and how it has been the core foundation for my success. And by now, you
have perused through some of the stories of The Slight Edge readers—people from
all walks of life whose lives have changed by adhering to the Slight Edge philosophy.
I am overwhelmed and humbled each and every time I read about how
ordinary people are now living extraordinary lives just by adding a few daily
disciplines to their daily regimen.
As I pore over the thousands of notes and letters we have received over the
years, I began to see a pattern of certain principles these people followed that are
a part of the Slight Edge philosophy—principles that I have taught in some form
over the years, but have never put down on paper until now.
I was able to isolate seven specific and actionable principles that you can
apply right now and use as a guidepost as you head into the next part of the book.
Before you can master the Slight Edge in your own life you need a game plan to
guide you along the way.

76

The Slight Edge

No. 1: Show Up

Hope begins in the dark, the stubborn hope that if you
just show up and try to do the right thing, the dawn will
come. You wait and watch and work: you don’t give up.
— Anne Lamott

Woody Allen, the famous playwright, once said that 80 percent of success
is showing up. I am one that subscribes to this philosophy wholeheartedly. You
have already won half the battle if you will commit in showing up every day. The
rest is left up to skill, knowledge, drive and execution.
The story of Jorge Diaz epitomizes the importance of showing up every day
no matter the circumstances. Today he is a professional boxer who in November
2010 defended his Featherweight crown in Atlantic City and has a record of
15-0 as of this printing. Not bad for a kid who grew up in one of the toughest
neighborhoods in New Jersey.
After reading The Slight Edge in 2006, he said the book changed his philosophy
and approach to the sport of boxing. Here is a short segment of his story:
I have been boxing since I was 11. I am from a tough neighborhood and
had very young parents who were struggling financially, so we didn’t have
money for a boxing trainer to spend one-on-one time with me, but I applied
the Slight Edge principles and showed up to the gym to practice every single
day—nothing could stop me from showing up.
For years I would lose at finals or walk away with a bronze. More often
than not I lost in the finals of national events. Even when I was upset from
losing, I firmly believed in the Slight Edge principles and the compounding
of my efforts. Ten years later I am now starting to see the fruits of my labor
and am currently the Featherweight champion with a record of 15-0.
Now that I am a little older and wiser I firmly believe at a greater
level in all the philosophies of The Slight Edge. I have learned how to
use my past as a tool to help make my ride to the future a little easier. I
firmly believe that if I keep my simple daily routine consistent, with nothing
fancy, just keep refining my craft and keep swimming in the bucket of milk,
I know that it will turn into butter.
Wow! Jorge had every excuse not to show up to the gym every day, but
he did it anyway because he knew that by doing the little things every day it
would eventually give him the strength, discipline and smarts to bring him the
Featherweight championship. Congratulations Jorge on your success!

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 77
I had the distinct pleasure of teaching this principle to my daughter Amber
when she achieved her life-long goal of becoming a Gator at the University of
Florida. For those who know me there is no bigger fan of this school. I had spent
my daughter’s early years giving her not so subtle hints as to where she should go
when the time came to choose a college. I guess my prodding worked!
It was at her freshman orientation when I was able to share with Amber the
importance of showing up. We, along with thousands of other incoming freshmen
and their parents, were sitting in the audience when the dean of students announced
from the podium that they had 6,700 incoming freshmen that year. Of that group,
the average GPA average was a 4.0. The SAT scores were in the top 10 percent of
the nation. Intimidating words, to say the least. I wasn’t sure if he was trying to
motivate or scare them. Amber, I was afraid, was feeling the latter.
This would her first true competition since high school, where she also
averaged a 4.0 GPA. But she knew that her natural talents that got her to the top
of her high school class may not be enough to give her an upper hand in college.
To ease her anxiety we went out to dinner and the first question out of her
mouth before we ever sat down was “Dad, I’m going up against the best of the
best. What am I going to do to get an edge on my classmates?” Calmly but
surely, I said to her, “It’s going to be so easy to beat these students.” Amber
rolled her eyes and was a little worried what she was getting herself into.
What I shared with her were some simple philosophies that would lay the
foundation for her college career. I said, “First off, you can beat half of these kids
simply by showing up.” Sounds too easy, right? I could tell Amber was still a little
confused by the simplicity of my statement. But I wasn’t done. I told her, “If you
will also go to every single class, even when those around you will pressure you
to stay home, you will beat half these students by outlasting them.” I could tell
things were starting to click a little in her mind. Amber was already used to going
to school every day in high school. This was something she could do. She did it
for four years in high school. I could tell by the look on her face she was starting
to believe me. But the lesson had just begun.

No. 2: Be Consistent

In baseball, my theory is to strive for consistency,
not to worry about the numbers. If you dwell
on statistics you get shortsighted; if you aim for
consistency, the numbers will be there at the end.
— Tom Seaver

78

The Slight Edge

Showing up is important, but its natural
companion consistency is what makes it a powerful
duo. Showing up consistently is where the magic
happens. I told Amber she not only needed to show up every day for school
but it had to be coupled with at least two hours of study per day. Again, this was
something Amber already knew how to do from high school that had led her to
a 4.0 GPA. From my own experience I know how easy it is to get caught up in
the vicious cycle of cramming for tests. My advice to her was to leave that to the
others. This lesson also came with a disclaimer.
These things, though easy to do, were also very easy not to do. She would
be challenged by roommates and other friends to skip class for other campus
activities that I know are all part of the college experience. I could tell she was
starting to get what I was saying, but could it be that simple just to show up every
day for class and study for two hours a day?
The first sign of success came three weeks later when Amber called and said,
“Dad, remember that class I have with 400 students in it? Well, there are only 80
people who come now.” So what could have happened in three weeks? Amber
said they hadn’t had a test yet so no one could have flunked out. In less than three
weeks, 75 percent of her class was gone. I told her to just keep showing up and to
study for two hours a day.
Four years later, right on time, Amber graduated at the very top of her
business class just by doing those two simple things—easy principles that if
applied daily can yield fabulous results.
Amber wasn’t any better or smarter than the other kids. They were the
cream of the crop, top-notch students. But Amber had one distinct advantage the
others didn’t: she had a philosophy that drove her to stay on course even when
everyone else was doing the opposite. She showed up consistently and succeeded
because she had a simple philosophy that she applied every day, rain or shine.

Consistency Yields Results
I am a big sports fan and sports always make wonderful metaphors for life.
The lessons learned from sports are many and are used frequently when I speak
to large audiences. One of them is the importance of consistency. To be a great
football team, not only do you have to practice every day, but practicing includes
running the same plays over and over again until everyone gets them right, so all
that is left is the execution.

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 79
Head baseball coach and The Slight Edge reader Russell Stockton of Houston
knows firsthand how constant repetition pays off for his team. In his 20 years
as a head baseball coach, mostly at smaller colleges, he never had the luxury of
landing a “blue chip” recruit for his team. To equal the playing field a few years
ago he instilled the Slight Edge principles into his coaching philosophy. And it
has produced amazing results, earning him a conference title and a trip to the
NCAA Regional tournament for the first time in 10 years.
Stockton has also been very successful in getting his team to buy into
mastering the simple fundamentals of the game. In a letter he sent us, he tells
of one pitcher, who wasn’t expected to break into the starting rotation at the
beginning of the season, but ended up being one of the most valuable players on
his team come playoff time. Here is his story.
I was a new assistant coach at the university and was assigned to the
pitchers. The head coach gave me the rundown on all the guys and told me
who to spend the most time with. This one player, we will call Tom, he told
me not to spend much time with him, as he was a non-factor. However, this
player bought into the Slight Edge concept that I taught him and he did
the drills religiously. By the end of the year, because he applied the Slight
Edge principles and had improved his game so much, he was drafted in the
third round and signed for a little less than $500,000. He should be in the
big leagues next year.
Stockton has also been very successful in getting his team to buy into
mastering the simple fundamentals of the game. The best example Stockton uses
in how he implements the Slight Edge philosophy is with his hitters.
I tell my hitters, when practice is over, if they choose to, go to the
batting cage and hit two buckets of balls, approximately 100 swings, it will
only take about 20 minutes (easy to do). However, most leave and go home
(also easy to do). But if they take 100 extra swings five days a week they
will have 500 extra swings by the end of the week. I tell them they probably
will not be much better. But don’t stop, do that all four weeks of the month.
So by the end of the first month they should have 2,000 extra swings.
You might start seeing a positive change. But don’t stop; if you do
this for all 10 months of the school year, by the time we hit the playoffs
you should have 20,000 extra swings. But if you can take at least five
teammates with you to the batting cages, then our team will be getting
100,000 extra swings. The year we won the conference title I had six to
eight hitters who bought into this idea.

80

The Slight Edge
There are some who won’t be as dedicated as the baseball players led by
Coach Stockton in doing the little things every day. Some people when they get
the tiniest amount of freedom fall off the wagon and stop doing everything they
were taught to do. Why does this happen? Simply because they are now in an
environment where they find themselves with no structure—no one telling them
what to do. The principles of showing up consistently give people the structure
they will need in their lives in portions they can handle.

No. 3: Have a Good Attitude

Attitude is a little thing that makes a big difference.
— Winston Churchill

Not only do you need to show up consistently, you need to do it with a good
attitude. Why is attitude so important? According to author and leadership icon
John C. Maxwell, attitude makes all the difference in the world. I got the chance to
interview John recently on the topic of attitude and he told me the following:
When all things are equal, attitude will set you apart from anything
else. When you’re going for a job, it’s the difference maker. If a girl has a
choice between two handsome men where one has a great attitude and the
other one has a lousy attitude, nine times out of 10 she’s going to pick the
man with the best attitude. It’s a difference maker for coaches who have
two athletes who are of similar skill level and are looking for who to play.
Attitude really is the difference maker.
Having a good attitude has proven to be a key in longevity of life. I was
watching CNN one night and a well-known doctor was talking about a report
he had just released where he studied the 25 longest living civilizations on earth,
where people lived well past the age of 100.
He went through the process of finding out the common threads these
successful civilizations have in common. Keep in mind these civilizations were
not connected by race, geography, DNA or genetics. In his findings the number
one characteristic—far greater than number two—that determined whether you
live over 100 years of age, is a positive outlook on life.
Attitude my friends, attitude. Many would think it would be their
diet or their genetic code that determines one’s health. That obviously is
true, but the difference maker, as John C. Maxwell alluded to earlier, is our
attitude—our positive outlook on life—the key factor for us living long and
productive lives.

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 81
And with as much traveling and speaking as I do, I’ve developed this
uncanny ability to spot givers and the takers when it comes to attitude. Givers
are those people who brighten the room with their positive vibe and excitement
for life. Takers are those who immediately seem to dim the room with their lack
of excitement and depressing outlook on life.
I can feel a “dimmer” coming toward me from far away. There could be
50 people in the room and I could spot the one who is sucking the life out of
the room. I just run from these kinds of people. I’m looking for people with an
infectious positive attitude, who bring energy, vitality and who brighten the
room, not dim the room with their nagging and negativity.

Beware of the Cuckoos
It’s hard to have a good attitude with all that is going on in society. Negativity
can show up at your doorstep every single day, seven days a week, with or without
your permission. We are constantly bombarded by negative messages from the
media and other sources that can impact the way we look at life.
Why do you think publishers put magazines and newspapers where they
do in grocery and convenience stores? Because that’s where they have the best
chance of selling you their fish wrap, to put it bluntly. But I will tell you right
now, there’s not one thing in those magazines that you need to know—not one
thing that is going to help you lead a better life. Those magazines are “cuckoo.”
Cuckoos are not limited to magazines and other news media outlets. They
are people we work and associate with on a daily basis. Now let me tell you
something right up front. I have worked with a lot of different people from all
walks of life in my career. Many have been hard workers, committed-to-a-cause
kind of people who have an incredible ability to get things done. On the flipside,
I have also worked with those who are just plain cuckoo. They are professionals
in the art of distraction, who take people’s attention away from the task at hand.
They will drive you crazy if you let them.
You have people just like this in your office. They congregate at the water
cooler and dish out the latest gossip on who’s doing what, complain about how
much they hate their job, and even make fun of people who are trying to improve
the workplace morale by being beacons of positivity. Again, there are people who
brighten the room, and there are the cuckoos at the water cooler, folks who dim
the room with their negativity.
When I was in my 20s and building my solar company in Albuquerque,
New Mexico, there was a lady named Carol Cooke, an industry icon who knew
everything and anything about the solar business. She had some sage advice for

82

The Slight Edge
me about these “dimmers.” She said, “Jeffrey, here is how I see it. There is one
born every minute, and the sad thing is most of them live.”
What Carol gave me was a philosophy, an attitude, and she basically said,
you’re not going to change how some people are. Some people are just cuckoo, and
there is just no getting around it. But here is what you need to ask yourself. Am I
going to let these people frame how I feel about myself? Because I’ll tell you what
folks, the “cuckoos” are not going away. And they are going to do everything in
their power to make you join them in their craziness. Don’t listen to them.

How to Inoculate Yourself from the Cuckoos
One of my all-time favorite books is Think and Grow Rich, the timeless classic
written by Napoleon Hill. He was commissioned to write the book by Andrew
Carnegie, the wealthy steel magnate and one of the most famous philanthropists
of all time. Hill traveled the globe to interview the world’s 500 most important
people of his era. His task was to break down the characteristics they have most
in common and write a book about it.
One of the traits they had in common was they believed you needed to
create a mastermind group of like-minded people who see things the way you
do in order to inoculate yourself from the cuckoos (the original text doesn’t say
“cuckoos,” but I’m pretty sure Hill would have agreed with the name).
Now what does this finding tell us? Remember, these were some of the
smartest people in the world at the time yet they built a system to inoculate
themselves from the masses of negativity. My opinion is if you do the opposite
of what the majority does, nine times out of ten you’re going to be right. That’s
why Arthur Schopenhauer, the great German philosopher and businessman,
hundreds of years ago said “Every truth passes through three stages before it
is recognized. In the first it is ridiculed, in the second it is opposed, in the third
it is regarded as self-evident.” To put it simply, just because you encounter
opposition from “dimmers” and are ridiculed for stepping out of your comfort
zone by putting out positive ideas and solutions, you cannot allow these people
to frame what you know to be true.
It takes a lot of guts, faith, perseverance and a healthy dose of positive
attitude to go through the public ridicule and opposition of people telling you
your ideas are worthless.

Embrace the Funk
It’s hard to stay positive with so much negativity out there in the world
today. And no matter how you try to inoculate yourself from the “cuckoos,” no

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 83
one is safe from their grasp, me included. Let me tell you a story that will help
illustrate what I mean.
I was speaking in Palm Springs to a crowd of about 2,500 people. At the end
of my speech I wanted them to be able to ask any question about the presentation
I just gave. For the next three hours we had a Q&A session, and halfway through
it a woman from the audience took the microphone; I remember she had a strong
presence about her. She said to me, “Jeff, you obviously take care of yourself, you
are very successful …” Then she got to a part that I will never forget.
She proceeded to say, “What are people like us supposed to do? A lot of us are
looking to get what you have. What is the secret to getting through the tough times?”
This is a question I had never received before and I was a little stumped at first. Just
then I received a little inspiration from somewhere and proceeded to tell her that there
are days when I wake up and I’m in what I call “the funk,” where life feels heavy,
depressing and I just don’t want to get out of bed because I just don’t feel right.
The first thing I do when I’m feeling this way is I take inventory of my blessings.
I have people who love me, I have great relationships, I’m healthy, I’m financially
independent, etc. But it still doesn’t go away immediately; in fact, sometimes it
takes several hours or days to get out of the funk.
Now I don’t have much to complain about, but the funk still gets me. I don’t
think it matters how “successful” you are in life, the funk is still going to get you
at times. It comes for everyone—it doesn’t discriminate.
I told that woman that, number one, she is normal. Everyone gets the funk.
But here is what I have learned. I finally came to a realization one day (this is what
saved me) that there is no way I can understand love, if I haven’t felt hurt. I can’t
know good without knowing what’s bad. I can’t feel happy and content without
feeling the funk. Life is ebb and flow.
So when bad things are happening to you, you need to “embrace the funk”
with the principles you have learned in this book. When something is hard or
difficult and adversity is at your front door, embrace it, because it will refine
you like a refiner’s fire and make you stronger. You can’t know happiness unless
you feel sadness. If you embrace it as part of the process, I tell you it can be life
altering. This has helped so many people get unstuck.
Life is going to get you down and the funk is going to get you. Embrace it
and fight through it and know you are not alone. You are no different than anyone
out there. Without knowing you and what your strengths and weaknesses are, I
feel like I know you, because I’ve met hundreds of people who are just like you,
who have applied these Slight Edge principles to take baby steps out of the funk,
and it has made a huge difference in their lives.

84

The Slight Edge

The Happiness Movement
So much of projecting a positive attitude begins with having a positive and
happy outlook on life. The tough economy we’re going through surely has changed
the definition of happiness for many people. Things that made us happy a few years
ago may not make us happy today. And the search for what makes people happy
and its effect on those around us has spawned a new movement the likes of which
I have never seen before. Do a Google search on “happiness books” and you’ll be
amazed at how many best-selling books deal with the topic of happiness.
In the Happiness Advantage, author Shawn Achor spent 10 years studying the
topic of happiness and his research resulted in some very interesting observations.
In his book he breaks down the conventional wisdom that says if we work
hard and have success, then—and only then—we will be happy. We say to
ourselves “If I could only get that promotion or lose 10 pounds then I will truly
be happy. Success first, happiness second. Achor says his research—as well as
other studies—prove that it’s actually the other way around: that happiness is the
precursor to success, not merely the result.
Achor states in his book the following:
If we are positive our brains are more alert and engaged, free to create,
which eventually leads to more productivity …happiness and optimism
actually fuel performance and achievement—giving us the competitive edge
that I call the Happiness Advantage.
Waiting to be happy limits our brain’s potential for success, whereas
cultivating positive brains makes us more motivated, efficient, resilient, creative
and productive, which drives performance upward. This discovery has been
confirmed by thousands of scientific studies and in my own work and research
on 1,600 Harvard students and dozens of Fortune 500 companies worldwide.

Delivering Happiness Is Big Business
No one knows that happiness precedes success better than Tony Hsieh, the
CEO of Zappos.com. Tony’s journey includes making Zappos.com one of the
hottest and most beloved online retailers. He grew the company from almost no
sales in 1999 to over $1 billion in gross sales, annually. That got the attention
of Amazon.com, who purchased the company for $1.2 billion in 2009. Hsieh’s
success comes down to one philosophy: delivering happiness—happy employees
and happy customers equals success.
Tony understood that delivering outstanding customer service as an online
retailer can be tough. Since customers can’t touch and feel what they are buying,

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 85
they need to go the extra mile in eliminating any and all customer fears of buying
online by offering free shipping both ways. If something doesn’t fit, send it back
for free. Zappos looks at these extra costs as marketing expenses, a minor tradeoff
in their eyes for a customer who raves about their shopping experience. In essence,
they are creating what they call a WOW experience, which their customers
remember for a long time and usually tell their friends and family about.
Zappos.com employees are just as passionate about delivering happiness
through outstanding customer service as their fearless leader. This is due to the
culture that Hsieh and his executive team have developed with their employees.
They are not just order takers, but invested partners committed to delivering the
best customer service in the industry.
In his book Delivering Happiness, Hsieh describes their core philosophy:
At Zappos.com, we decided a long time ago that we wanted our
brand to be about the very best customer service and the very best customer
experience. We believe that customer service shouldn’t be just a department,
it should be the entire company … What’s the best way to build a brand?
In a word: culture. Our belief is that if you have the culture right, most of
the other stuff—like great customer service, or building a great long-term
brand, or passionate employees and customers—will happen naturally on
its own.
It is refreshing to see scientific studies that tout a positive attitude as a
precursor to success and to see big companies integrating it into their culture.
Hard work will always be an ingredient for success, but when mixed with a happy
disposition and good attitude, not only will you begin to experience the fruits of
success, but you will also attract others to help you along the way.

No. 4: Be Committed for a Long Period of Time

It takes a long time to grow an old friend.
— John Leonard

Let’s summarize where we are so far. First, we need to show up, be consistent
and have a good attitude. The fourth Slight Edge principle is to practice these
principles for a long period of time. Just as a farmer has to wait a full season
to reap his harvest, you must do the same. In my opinion, this is the hardest
principle for our microwave and fast-food culture to deal with because we want
instant results now, not in 120 days or a year from now!

86

The Slight Edge
Showing up consistently with a good attitude for a short period of time isn’t
going to cut it. You’ve got to show up consistently with the good attitude, being
patient and persistent for a long time to create lasting change.
There is a great book called Outliers by Malcolm Gladwell that illustrates this
point perfectly. There is a chapter in the book where he brings to light his research
into some of the most important industries—software and manufacturing giants,
educators, the military—and how many hours go into making a product good
enough to where they are ready to sell it on the open market. What they found
was it took about 10,000 hours before they really got good at it. That’s 40 hours
a week, times five years.
Like these industry giants, you’ve got to show up with the good attitude and
you’ve got to put in your 10,000 hours or more before you come close to mastering
anything, let alone golf, which will take a bit longer … like your lifetime!
That’s the reason why I wrote The Slight Edge, to show people there is no
shortcut to success. No matter what you are trying to accomplish, you need to ask
yourself, Am I willing to put in 10,000 hours or more to get what I want?

Give Yourself Time
I’ve been around the personal-development world for a long time. While I
was CEO of The People’s Network, we were the largest producers of personaldevelopment content in the United States. I was blessed to be sitting in that
position during the most exciting time in personal-development history.
The one problem I noticed within the personal-development arena is those
who buy into the “Quantum Leap” theory as discussed in Chapter 5. In order
for authors to sell books, they need to convince you that their program is going to
change your life in a certain amount of time. Most people are looking for a quick
fix and aren’t interested in learning the truth: that success doesn’t come overnight
or even in few weeks or months. It takes a lot of time and a lot of hard work.
Take the story of The Slight Edge reader Tray Honeycutt from Victorville,
California. He struggled with his weight for many years and he just couldn’t seem
to make any changes. He was looking for the quantum leap answer. Two days after
finishing the book he decided to put the Slight Edge to the test. Over the course of
40 weeks he lost 60 pounds, and got in such good shape that he became a personal
trainer and started teaching the principles of The Slight Edge to his clients.
You see, he didn’t have to starve himself on some fad diet or exercise for
hours like they do on The Biggest Loser. It really came down to a few disciplines
compounded over time that made the difference for Tray.

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 87
Once successful people find something that works, they repeat that action
over and over again with a good attitude over a long period of time until they are
successful. Eventually the compound effect will kick in, just like in Tray’s case.
And that’s all this book is about. Trying to get people to slow down and realize
that you are not going to feel the results of your actions immediately.
In fact by the time you feel the results, you have already done most of the
work. The problem is that most people are not willing to show up consistently
and stay in the game long enough with a good attitude for a long period of time
because they have the wrong philosophy.
The problem is that most of these “90-day programs to a better you” don’t
give you enough time to build up a belief level in yourself that you can continue
past the 90-day time period. By committing to things that are manageable to
implement every day you greatly increase your chances of success. As discussed
in earlier chapters, I tell people to simply read 10 pages of a good book a day. Not
just for 90 days, but for 250 days. (I’m giving you 115 days off because I’m a nice
guy. If you show up every day and read 10 pages, that’ll be 2,500 pages by the end
of the year. That’s about 10 books.)
And if you are reading the right stuff, it’s not only going to help form your
philosophy, but it’s also going to shift your attitude, is it not? You see, what most
people do is they read a book and then they don’t go back and read it again. You’ll
learn so much more the second time around. Give yourself more time and you
will be impressed by how much you retain by taking your time to get it right and
to learn from your mistakes.

No. 5: Have Faith and a Burning Desire

There is one quality which one must possess to win,
and that is definiteness of purpose, the knowledge of
what one wants, and a burning desire to possess it.
— Napoleon Hill

Of the 500 most successful people who Hill interviewed in Think and Grow
Rich, the number one commonality among them was faith along with a burning
desire. Desire is what gets you up early and keeps you up late. It’s what keeps you
motivated to press forward when adversity hits.
There are going to be all types of obstacles placed in front of you during your
lifetime. And you can determine the size of a person by the size of the problem
that keeps them down. Successful people look at a problem

and see opportunity.

88

The Slight Edge
You have to change your philosophy about problems because they are always
going to be there. They are a part of everyday life and they are not going away.
You have to have a burning desire to get through, just like The Slight Edge reader
Aaron Grove:
For as long as I can remember I wanted more in life; however, I
grew up poor, from humble beginnings. That is where my burning desire
started. I’ll never forget the day that the philosophy of the Slight Edge was
introduced to me. Most vividly I can recall reading this book every morning
and starting right then to implement small activities, daily, assured this
would be the way over time—to physical fitness, eating right, building and
maintaining relationships, building my business and finances, spiritual
alignment, etc. I knew consistently showing up with a good attitude for a
long period of time would get me to where I wanted to be. And then one day,
Presto! Results were visible!
Aaron had a burning desire to make the changes in his life. By implementing
those small activities into his daily regimen, he got the results he needed. Just like
Aaron, you have to show up consistently with a good attitude over a long period
of time with a solid desire to change the trajectory of your life.

No. 6: Be Willing to Pay the Price

Leaders aren’t born, they are made. And they are made
just like anything else, through hard work. And that’s the
price we’ll have to pay to achieve that goal, or any goal.
— Vince Lombardi

Anything worth having is worth working and paying a price for. That’s the
price of entry. And If you’re not willing to pay a price for whatever it is you want,
the price of neglect is far worse than the price of commitment. In Chapter 10
we will get into this topic a little more in detail, but I would like to preface this
principle here first.
Years ago it hit me that if I didn’t choose to do something to become
successful, I was going to become unsuccessful for the rest of my life. Think
about that. If you don’t figure out something to be successful at, you have to be
unsuccessful at it for the rest of your life.
In other words, the price of neglect is pretty brutal. The price of committing
to something, showing up consistently with a good attitude over a long period of
time while having faith and a burning desire and being willing to pay the price

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 89
is far easier than the true price of neglect. But there is a price that

you’re going to have to pay.

I’d like to introduce you to Pablo Felix, who I think is one of the best examples
I can find of someone who was willing to pay the price for what he wanted. Pablo
had one slight disadvantage. He has been deaf since birth. Slight Edge principles
have been instrumental in both his business and personal life. Here is his story:
Unfortunately, my parents did not realize that I was deaf until the
age of 6, when I started preschool. I began learning American Sign Language
upon entering school and spent many years trying to overcome my language delay.
Because my family never learned sign language in order to communicate,
I was always left out of family decisions. When a serious family situation came
up, I was never even told what had happened. Time and time again I was
given little or no information necessary to make sense of the world because it
took too long or was too difficult to attempt communication.
As a result of being left out of so many experiences, I developed a sense
of not belonging even to my own family. Like most people my age, after
college I got married and started a family of my own. I dreamed of getting
a good job and climbing the corporate ladder. I quickly found that corporate
America held no place for a deaf person. I was regularly passed over for
promotions and treated like a second-class citizen. I was denied access to the
very information needed to be an effective manager.
For many years, I carried lingering resentments from the past. Even
though my wife and children could hear, I found it difficult to overcome the
disconnect I felt with mainstream society.
I decided to start my own business in order to control my future. I decided
I needed to learn from other successful people so I interacted with people who
could hear, more than ever before in my life.
After being told that reading was a critical aspect of my new endeavor,
I began my journey of personal development. I realized that my life was not
on the path necessary for success. I was on a downward slope along the path
of blame, until I discovered the Slight Edge. I was able to change the negative
compounded effects of years of unhappiness to a life of responsibility. My life
became full of hope, excitement and joy.
I was able to finally release my resentments; I began setting goals
for both my personal and professional life. I was able to attain many of
professional goals and even outperform many of the people in my field. I now
have had the pleasure of helping many more deaf people reach success.

90

The Slight Edge
I teach them the importance of positive daily focus. We track our desires,
goals, personal development, and accomplishments in notebooks, titled,
“What Do You Want?” This simple daily activity compounded over time
has kept us on the positive upward path to success. I strive daily to become
a better leader, father and husband by applying Slight Edge principles to
my life.
Instead of whining about it and letting his employer continue to brand him
as a problem rather than a solution, Pablo made the necessary changes in his
life to find his calling by helping members of his deaf community find value
and purpose.

7
6

Integrity

Willing to Pay
the Price

4

Desire/Faith

1

Show Up

2

5

Plant,
Cultivate,
Harvest

Be
Consistent

3

Good
Attitude

No. 7: Practice Slight Edge Integrity

Integrity is not a conditional word. It doesn’t blow
in the wind or change with the weather.
— John D. MacDonald

There are many definitions of integrity, but the
one most applicable to the Slight Edge is what you
do when no one is watching, and that is what I call

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 91

Slight Edge integrity. It is also doing the thing you
said you were going to do long after the mood you
said it in has left you.
Most kids when they leave the comfort and structure of high school and
home life are rudderless—like fish out of water. They are not used to the freedom
and responsibility placed on them once they are out on their own making
decisions for themselves. Many fail to plan and prioritize their time and end up
making poor decisions. Their integrity in doing the little things every day has
been compromised by the lure of freedom and being on your own.
My daughter Amber didn’t have to have integrity when she was young
because we were there to help her make those choices. But when she left the nest
and went to school 1,500 miles away, this responsibility fell to her. She would
have to put into action the philosophies we taught her growing up. We were no
longer there to help her or look over her shoulder to make sure she was making
correct decisions. The integrity clock for Amber was already in motion. Would
she do those daily disciplines when no one was watching? Would she show up
consistently and study two hours a day like she was taught? Thankfully she did
and she was rewarded for it. She was willing to do the little things—those daily
tasks that seem insignificant to most people.

Kobe Knows Slight Edge Integrity
As I’ve stated throughout the book, I’m a big sports fan because so much
of life is woven throughout the tapestry of sports. Those in the Hall of Fame are
individuals who didn’t have to be prodded or told what to do to become successful.
It was ingrained in them. Kobe Bryant in many sportswriters’ opinions has taken
over the mantle as the best player in the game. LeBron James might have another
opinion, but the facts are truly in Kobe’s corner. Why?
Sports Illustrated polled 190 NBA players and asked if they could have
anyone in the NBA on their team for one game, who they would want to take the
last shot with the game on the line. It wasn’t even close:
Kobe Bryant, Lakers G…..76%
Chauncey Billups, Nuggets G…..3%
LeBron James, Cavaliers F…..3%
Paul Pierce, Celtics F…..3%
Dwyane Wade, Heat G…..2%

92

The Slight Edge
What does this have to do with integrity? Not much, but it teaches a more
important lesson. The poll is just the end result of Kobe Bryant’s insatiable desire
to become the greatest basketball player in the world. No one had to tell him as a
young man he needed to spend hours outside of practice honing his craft. He did
it on his own when no one was watching. For Kobe Bryant, taking the last shot
when the game is on the line is second nature because he has practiced it so many
times on the blacktop when no one was watching—because he knew that is what
he needed to do to succeed. The only difference is he gets paid an insane amount
of money to do it now.

Slight Edge Business Integrity
The same can be said about those who venture into starting their own
companies. Why is the failure rate so high for startups? Most everyone knows
that lack of capital is by far the biggest reason companies don’t make it past
two years. But there is also an integrity component that is the cause for so many
business failures.
When you own a business, there is no one telling you that you need to be
at work or shouting in your ear to make sales calls. No one is there to make
sure you are on top of your vendors and your books are up to date. This is
up to you to do now. And many business owners just don’t have the Slight
Edge integrity it takes to remain above water. They become intoxicated by the
freedom of being their own boss and fail to maintain the kind of structure to
become successful.
Yet there are many startups that do put into practice the Slight Edge integrity
it takes to make it. Jeremy T. was a highly ambitious 24-year-old gym owner, and
for him, success couldn’t come fast enough. It wasn’t until he read The Slight Edge
that he realized that success would need to be slow and steady and consistent over
time. He needed to take inventory of what it would take to become successful and
apply those steps consistently with or without anyone watching to make sure he
did them. Two years later Jeremy’s business quadrupled:
I have opened two additional gyms, an online media company and
we’re on track to quadruple our revenue once again. Since reading The
Slight Edge I am no longer looking into the unknown, but instead looking
to the present possibilities that are ingrained in my daily habits. The book
gave me a paradigm shift. I have faith that my daily habits will lead to
success or failure, the choice is mine. Pay attention to your daily habits and
it will pay off.

The 7 Slight Edge Principles 93
The Slight Edge gave Jeremy a structure, a foundation, a daily philosophy he
could implement that has brought him success. And you too can use Slight Edge
integrity to improve your health, your relationships, your personal development,
etc. You name it, the sky’s the limit. It just takes discipline, hard work and a desire
to change.

Are You Ready to Do the Little Things
When Nobody Is Watching?
There is a great quote that says “If you add a little to a little and do this often,
soon the little will become great.” Whether it was at school, corporate America or
starting my own business, that quote has been the formula I have used my entire
life to gain the Slight Edge.
Once we published The Slight Edge, it has taken on a life of its own. The
stories I have shared with you in this chapter and throughout the book are a
testament that the philosophy works. Jorge became a featherweight champion,
my daughter Amber graduated at the top of her business class, Coach Stockton’s
baseball players were drafted into the Major Leagues, Pablo overcame his lack of
hearing to become a valuable member of his community, and Jeremy has taken
his gym to unprecedented heights.
These are everyday people, who by implementing Slight Edge principles
into their lives have done amazing things. Successful people do the little things
that seem to make no difference at all when they are doing them. Doing them
over, over and over again, consistently and persistently, with a good attitude over
a long period of time, is what the Slight Edge is all about.
Just as my daughter asked me how she could separate herself from the pack,
you have the chance to do the same. And in doing so, not only will you change
yourself but you may also change the people around you.

Key Points of Chapter 6
Over the years I have isolated seven actionable principles that you can apply
right now into life, every day. Show up consistently with a good attitude over a
long period of time. Have faith and a burning desire, be willing to pay the price
and have slight edge integrity and discipline to do those things even when no one
is looking.

94

The Slight Edge

By the age of 30 on paper I was worth a million dollars. I owned land,
businesses, oil wells, I was even the President of the Chamber of
Commerce, an upstanding citizen of the town— life was good. In the next
decade at the ripe age of 40 all that had changed. I found myself newly
divorced, bankrupt with five children to support. My self-esteem was
in the toilet. A chance encounter with an old acquaintance changed
everything. He had an opening at his company that he offered me and
just as important he recommended some great books and resources I
should start reading to get my psyche back on the right track.
When I started this new job we were discussing my salary. I told him,
“I will work for free and you can tell me what I am worth.” I was a
tele-marketer making cold calls all day. My nights were spent on the
floor of the office space I worked from as I couldn’t afford my own
place. Each day I was the first to work and the last to leave. I would stay
on the phone making hundreds of calls with every response imaginable,
mostly not so favorable. I knew that I had within me the ability to turn my
life around once again. For that to happen it would require me each
and every day to practice the principles of the Slight Edge. It would
require that I set goals and do the daily disciplines that eventually, not
miraculously, would lead me to the vision I was holding for my life. I
mastered the mundane, day in and day out. About six weeks into the
job I had ZERO sales but persevered knowing that I was developing my
skills as a telemarketer and that it would pay off.
That day came when I was informed that one of the largest insurance
companies purchased over 150 tickets for their agents and would be
purchasing the same for another event we were promoting. At that
time it was the largest single sale ever made at this very well-established
company. I was eventually given the title of ‘Vice President’ and was
made a 50 percent partner of the company. All of this transpired
because I showed up consistently over a long period of time with a good
attitude. I had a burning desire and faith and was willing to pay the price.
And I was willing to do all this even when no one was watching. I am
now living out my dreams and making a positive difference sharing the
profound but simple principles of the Slight Edge.

—Steve Fleming, Santa Fe, New Mexico

CHAPTER 7

Two Life Paths

Two roads diverged in a yellow wood
And sorry I could not travel both
And be one traveler, long I stood
And looked down one as far as I could
To where it bent in the undergrowth.
Then took the other as just as fair
And having perhaps the better claim
Because it was grassy and wanted wear
Though as for that, the passing there
Had worn them really about the same.
And both that morning equally lay
In leaves no step had trodden black
Oh, I kept the first for another day!
Yet, knowing how way leads onto way
I doubted if I should ever come back.
I shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence
Two roads diverged in a wood
And I took the one less traveled by
And that has made all the difference.
— Robert Frost, The Road Not Taken

96

The Slight Edge
There was a time when the people of the world were convinced the sun
revolved around the Earth. A few visionaries stubbornly refused to accept what
was obvious to everyone else, and because Copernicus, Galileo and a handful
of others risked their lives to choose the road less traveled, the rest of the world
eventually caught on to what is now obvious to everyone in the twenty-first
century: the Earth revolves around the sun.
What’s more, in the last hundred years, we’ve discovered that even space
is curved (though that one’s still a little hard for most people to wrap their
minds around).
The truth is, everything is curved. There is no true straight line; everything is
changing—including your life.
You are on a journey, your life path. That path is a curve.
You’re curving either upward or downward.
It may seem to you that today was much like yesterday. It wasn’t. It
was different. Every day is. Appearances can be deceiving—and almost
always are. There may be times when things seem to be on a steady, even
keel. This is an illusion: in life, there is no such thing as staying in the same
place. There are no
straight lines;
everything curves. If you’re not increasing,
Simple
Disciplines
you’re decreasing.

+

L
I
F
AboveEand Below the Slight Edge

TIME

_

Simple
Er rors
in Judgement
Let’s take a look
at what
the Slight
Edge actually looks like by going back to
the wealthy man’s lesson. If you make a graph of the penny doubled every day
for a month, it will look something like this:

old
p.39

+

M
O
N
E Day
7
Y_

L
I
F

14

21

TIME

old
p.64

TIME

old
p.65

28

+
5%

E

old
p.39

_ Simple Er rors in Judgement

Two Life Paths 97
This is not only a picture of compound interest; it’s also a picture of how the
Slight Edge looks when it’s working for you.
Now, let’s get a sense of what the Slight Edge looks like and feels like when
it’s working against you instead. It’s simple: just put a mirror up to the first
illustration. This graph shows you that when it’s not working in your favor, the
Slight Edge can be a very sharp and unforgiving edge indeed!
old
TIME
If you understand and live by the law of compound interest, your life will p.64
Day
look like the upper
half of this graph. If you don’t understand and live by the law
of compound interest, your life will look like the lower half of this graph.

+

M
O
N
E
Y_

L
I
F
E

7

14

21

28

+
5%
TIME

_

old
p.65

95%

Wherever you may be in your own life, understanding the Slight Edge will
give you the tools to start fresh—right now!—and place yourself firmly on
the upper curve.
Responsibility
The upper curve is the formula for success: a few simple disciplines,old
repeated every day. The lower curve is the formula for failure: a few
simple errorsp.68
TIME
in judgment, repeated every day.
The upper curve represents that one person out of twenty, the five percent
Blame
who are successful and happy at the end of their lives. The lower curve represents
the other nineteen, the ninety-five percent who reach their “golden years” angry
and bitter, and have no idea or concept of how they got there or why. Life, it
seems to them, is unfair, and that’s just how it is. But you and I know that’s not
the case. It’s not a matter of being fair or unfair: it’s pure geometry, the geometry
of time.
Most people hold time as their enemy; they seek to avoid the passage of time
and strive to have results now. That’s a choice based on a philosophy. Successful

L
I
F
E

+

_

98

The Slight Edge
people understand that time is their friend. In every choice I make, every course
of action I take, I always have time in mind: time is my ally. That, too, is a choice
based on a philosophy.
Time will be your friend or your enemy; it will promote you or expose you.
It depends purely upon which side of this curve you decide to ride. It’s entirely
up to you.
If you’re doing the simple disciplines, time will promote you. If you’re

doing the few simple errors in judgment, time will
expose you—no matter how well you appear to be
doing right now. Time is the great equalizer.
Why People Don’t Fly

If God had meant man to fly, he would have
given him wings.
— Bishop Milton Wright

Have you ever wondered why people can’t fly? We have a phrase we use when
something difficult, painful or tragic happens; we say, “Whoa: that’s heavy.”
And indeed, it is. Life is heavy. The predominant force on Earth is gravity, and
gravity is always pulling you down.
Just ask Bishop Milton Wright, the founder of Huntingdon College in
Huntingdon, Indiana, who is reputed to have pointed out the self-evident truth
in the quote above during a sermon he delivered in 1890.
Some people, though, just can’t seem to accept self-evident truths. Like
two of Bishop Wright’s sons, who thirteen years later built and flew the first
successful, man-powered, heavier-than-air flying machine. Their names were
Wilbur and Orville.
Social science research says that as a child, you heard the word “No” about
40,000 times by the age of five—before you even started first grade. How many
times had you heard the word “Yes”? About 5,000. That’s eight times as many
no’s as yes’s. Eight times the force holding you down, compared to the force
lifting you up. Eight times the gravity against your desire to soar.
Don’t do that! Don’t say that to your grandmother! Don’t slouch! Don’t touch
that, it’s hot! Don’t talk to strangers! Don’t cross the street! No ... No ... No ...
Mind you, most of these no’s are well intended; like the police force motto,
their purpose is only to protect and serve. So I’m not criticizing the no’s. But
where are the yes’s?

Two Life Paths 99
Author Jerry Wilson, in his landmark book Word-of-Mouth Marketing,
based his revolutionary “exceptional customer service” strategy on a statistic
he’d found: the average customer will tell three people about a positive experience
with a business or product, but will talk about a negative experience to thirtythree people! Eleven bad experiences to one positive; eleven reasons an idea won’t
work to one reason it will.
I mentioned earlier that only about one person out of twenty will ever achieve
his or her goals and dreams in life. Regardless of what realm of life or work or play
we’re talking about, we’ll see an average success rate of not more than five percent.
Why is that?
Forty thousand no’s to five thousand yes’s. Thirty-three negatives to every
three positives. Is it any wonder that ninety-five percent of us are failing? Is it any
wonder most people don’t fly?
If you are one of those rare and special five-percenters who decides to
ignore gravity and take to the sky—one of those rare birds, like Orville or
Wilbur, who chooses to break free of the downward pull of life and rise to a
higher quality of life, accomplishment and success, to be a pioneer and risk
discomfort and ridicule for the sake of your dreams—well, I’ve got good news
and bad news.
The good news is, you’re already exceptionally well oriented toward success.
The bad news is, all those ninety-five others are going to be yanking on you,
sitting on you, naysaying and doomsaying on you, and doing their level best to
pull you back down. Why? Because if you succeed, it reinforces that they are not
where they want to be.
They know instinctively that there are only two ways to make their building
the highest building in town: build an even bigger one—or tear down all the
others. Since the odds are against most people building the big one, and since
it takes just too darn long to start seeing any results, and since they are not at all
aware of the Slight Edge, they’re taking the path of least resistance, and going
into the demolition business.
You can use the Slight Edge to break free of the downward pull of life and
become the best you can possibly be. Or, the Slight Edge will pull you down,
keep you down, and eventually take you out of your life. It’s up to you.
For things to change, you’ve got to change. For things to get better, you’ve got
to get better. It’s easy to do. But it’s easy not to do, too.

100

+

The Slight Edge

M
O
TIME
N Responsibility
Blame and
E Day
14 but he
21isn’t a 28
AY
man can fail7many times,
_

old
p.64

failure until he begins to blame somebody else.
— John Burroughs

If you want to measure where you are, if you want to know whether
you’re on the success curve or on the failure curve, or if you want to assess
5%
L and determine
anyone else
which curve they’re on, here’s how. There is one
attitude, I
one state of mind, which overwhelmingly predominates either sideold
TIME
F
p.65
of the curve.

+

TheE predominant state of mind displayed by
_ 95%
those people
on the failure curve is blame. The
predominant state of mind displayed by those
people on the success curve is responsibility.

L
I
F
E

+
Responsibility
TIME

_

old
p.68

Blame

People on the success curve live a life of responsibility. They take full
responsibility for who they are, where they are, and everything that happens
to them.
Taking responsibility liberates you; in fact, it is perhaps the single most
liberating thing there is. Even when it hurts, even when it doesn’t seem fair.
When you don’t take responsibility, when you blame others, circumstances,
fate or chance, you give away your power. When you take and retain full
responsibility—even when others are wrong or the situation is genuinely unfair—
you keep your life’s reins in your own hands.
Negative and difficult things happen to all of us; most of them are mostly or
completely out of our control. It’s how we react, how we view those circumstances

Two Life Paths 101
and conditions, that makes the difference between success and failure—and that
is completely within our control.

The five-percenters who dwell on the upper
curve know there are no excuses; they understand
and accept the fact that nobody can do it to them,
and nobody can do it for them. They live by the
axiom, “If it’s going to be, it’s up to me.” They set their own
standards—and their standards are high. They realize that their only limitations
are self-imposed. They understand that it is not what happens to them that’s
important, but how they respond to what happens that makes the difference
between their failure and success.
They are aware of the Slight Edge and they understand how it operates in
their lives.
People on the failure curve are masters of blame; they blame everyone and
everything—the economy, the government, the oil crisis, the weather, their
neighbors, the rich, the poor, the young, the old, their kids, their parents, their
boss, their co-workers, their employees. Life itself.
The inhabitants of the lower curve are life’s victims, the great mass of
“done-to’s.” The only way these folks can really make much sense of out life is to
conclude, “Life is a bitch—and then you die.”
I knew a man whose self-declared philosophy was, “Life is an unpleasant
practical joke which occurs somewhere between birth and death.” On which side
of the curve do you think he was living? Where was he headed? Can you imagine
what results that thought, “Life is an unpleasant practical joke,” would create
when magnified by the water-hyacinth-like force of time?
You know the expression, “Be careful what you wish for—you just might
get it”? It’s not even a question of what you wish for: be careful what you think.
Because what you think, multiplied by action plus time, will create what you get.
People on the failure curve are oblivious to the Slight Edge—or, if they are
aware of it, they take a position of opposition, as if their lives were dedicated to
proving that it isn’t real or doesn’t really work.
Responsibility is declaring oneself as cause in the matter. It is a context
from which to live one’s life.
Responsibility is not a burden, fault, praise, blame, credit, shame or
guilt. All these include judgments and evaluations of good and bad, right
and wrong, or better and worse. They are not responsibility ...

102

The Slight Edge

Responsibility starts with the willingness to deal with a situation from
and with the point of view, whether at the moment realized or not, that you
are the source of what you are, what you do and what you have.
It is not “right,” or even “true,” to declare oneself as “cause” in the
matter. It’s just empowering. By standing for yourself as cause, “what
happens” shifts from “happening to you” to “just happening” and,
ultimately, to “happening as a result of your being cause in the matter.
— Werner Erhard

Don’t Complain About What You Allow
The people on the upper half of the Slight Edge curve are the cause of what
happens in their lives. They view all the forces that brought them to this point—
God, parents, teachers, childhood, circumstances, you name it—with gratitude and
appreciation and without blame. And they view themselves as the cause for what
comes next in their life.
Are you your own cause?
The people on the upper curve take full responsibility for all the choices they
make in their lives and in their work. Do you? It’s easy to do ... and just as easy not
to do. And if you don’t take full responsibility for your thoughts and actions and
circumstances right now, will that kill you today? No ... but!
But that simple error in judgment compounded over time will absolutely,
positively destroy you.
Successful people do what unsuccessful people are not willing to do:
they take full responsibility for how the Slight Edge is working in their lives.

Unsuccessful people blame the Slight Edge for their
lives not working. Successful people know that they
cannot afford that luxury.
Past and Future
Try this experiment: Take a comfortable, seated position and look down at
the floor; then, without changing position, take the next five minutes to think
about your life. Anything and everything, whatever that means to you, just
think about your life.
Go ahead and do that now ...

Two Life Paths 103

“My recovery is a symbol of persistence,
courage and the Slight Edge.”
by Tracy Broughton, 2011 Ms. America®
As Ms. America® 2011, there is a lot of glitz and glamour that come along with
the title, but behind the glamour, what is really important is one’s real foundation
which should be built around character. I want to share my story with you in hopes
that in some way it inspires you, and that you know that all of your dreams are
attainable by having faith and determination and taking daily action to get there.
I was born a fighter, three months pre-mature, doctors said I was not going to
make it but I had other plans. In elementary school, my mother was diagnosed
with stage four cancer and given six to eight months to live. I still remember
the day that my mother told me to not worry about her cancer and that she
would see me graduate high school. Unfortunately, in junior high there were
many challenges at home that caused us to move eight times, in and out of
the state, within several years. I even lived on my own for a period of time, luckily
with financial help, because of the uncertain environment in the household. While
helping take care of my three siblings, my mother and working, I persevered
through traumatic times in my life by doing the little things, in each area of my
life, that didn’t seem to make any difference at the time I did them. I knew that if
I persevered I would arrive at the doorstep of my dreams eventually. I went on to
be a scholar athlete, played varsity sports, set school records, and took on many
leadership roles at school, including Senior Class Vice President.
Two months after graduating high school, about six years longer than they gave
her to live, my mother passed away. I went on to pursue my modeling career. I
channeled my energy and efforts into building my career. I worked tirelessly, doing
the things every day that were easy to do, easy not to do, and was featured
in magazines, calendars, catalogs, TV shows, videos, billboards, fashion shows,
commercials and beauty pageants.
I believe that the perseverance that it takes to succeed in modeling and acting
is the same thing that helped me with my recuperation after not one, but two car
accidents. In October of 1991 and December of 1996 I was in major car accidents
and sustained severe injuries that caused me to be admitted in to the Intensive
Care Unit and the hospital for months. In 1996 I was diagnosed Hemiplegic, I was
paralyzed on the left side of my body, and I was confined to a wheelchair.
My philosophies and faith are constants in my life, and they have helped me
through recovery and have continued to influence my life in a positive direction.
Through occupational and physical therapy, my rehab included working on my
speech, learning to tie my shoes, preparing food, transferring, bathing, and being
able to accomplish everyday needs on my own. Through years of therapy, at the
hospital, with doctors, at PT, in the gym, and at home, sometimes one to three
times a day, I had to stay consistent with a positive attitude. There were years of
little or no improvement or progress, yet I continued to believe and work towards
walking. The hard work seemed to make no difference at all, but it was internal
motivations that fueled my actions. I looked past my current circumstances,
and focused on the end result that I was trying to achieve. And defied what
many thought, that “I would never walk again.” I am now walking! There were
no extrinsic rewards for the subtle stages of progress over the last fourteen plus
years, these rewards only came when others were able to see me stand up and
then later walk. My continued recovery is a symbol of persistence, courage and
the Slight Edge.

104

The Slight Edge

I went on to make public appearances, win contests and I eventually resumed
my entertainment career. After running three offices in corporate America,
I eventually opened two of my own businesses: a florist and a legal insurance
business. I am a loving single mother of 11-year-old identical twin sons. I was in my
wheelchair when I had my twins and raised them for many years from the wheel
chair. I had many reasons to blame others or circumstances throughout my life,
but I chose to take responsibility for my future no matter what circumstances were
presented to me.
By doing the things that are easy to do, yet make no difference in the act of
doing them over a long period of time, I was able to, as a single mother, become
a successful business owner, servant leader, speaker and friend, as well as go from
wheel-chair bound to Ms. America® 2011!
A true testimony to the Slight Edge!
To inquire about Tracy Broughton’s speaking availability and or to learn more about Tracy Broughton, visit
www.tracybroughton.com
The Ms. America® Pageant is for women 26 years of age and up who are single, divorced or married. To learn
more about the pageant go to: www.MsAmericaPageant.com.

Now, clear your mind, walk around a minute, then come back and do the
second half: Take the same comfortable, seated position, only tilt your head up so
you’re looking at the ceiling. Spend the next five minutes thinking about your life.
Anything and everything, whatever that means to you, just think about your life.
Go ahead and do that now ...
I don’t know what results you had, but here’s what most people find: when
looking down, it’s pretty hard not to start thinking about the past. When gazing
upward, it’s pretty hard not to start thinking about the future.
I can promise you, that morning in the Phoenix airport, every single person
I saw rushing around was looking either straight ahead, or down!
People on the failure curve tend to focus on their past—and it pulls them
down. People on the success curve focus on their future—and it pulls them up.
People on the success curve don’t ignore the past, but they use it as a tool,
one of many with which they build their futures. People who live on the failure
curve use the past as a weapon with which they bludgeon themselves and the
people around them. Regrets, recriminations, remorse and retribution.

It seems most people live with one foot in the past,
saying “Only if things had been different, I would
be successful.” And the other foot in the future,
saying “When this or that happens I will be happy/

Two Life Paths 105

successful.” And they completely ignore the present,
which is all we really have. It’s only the decisions
that you make in the moment that are Slight Edge
decisions.
A friend of mine says that people make two lists about their spouses and
carry these lists around in their heads. The long list is a list of “what’s wrong,”
and they consult that list every day. The short list is a list of “what’s right.” That’s
the list they read for the eulogy.
People on the success curve don’t wait until the funeral. They burn the long
list and spend every day reading from the short list. They make themselves experts
in “what’s right,” and let go of “what’s wrong.” They never hold a grudge—not
because it’s morally wrong (although they may agree with that reason, too), but
because it gets in the way. It slows them down. They’re too busy moving toward
the future to be staring into the rearview mirror.

L
I
F
E

+
Future

old
p.72

TIME

_

Past

Slight Edge Life Paths

PHILOSOPHY  ATTITUDE – ACTIONS – RESULTS – LIFESTYLE

W h at ’ s c o m f o r t a b l e e ar l y b e

N

A

TIO
LA

unc
om
for
ta
bl
e

BUSINESS
PER
DE SON
VE
LO AL
PM
E

RE

• Blame/Neglect

comes

FI
N

la

te

r

C

ES

One of the quickest and most direct routes to getting yourself up and onto the
success curve is to get out of the past. Review the past, 5%
but only
for the purpose of
SUCCESS
realization
making aEASY
better plan.
responsibility
for of
the errors
TOReview
DO it, understand and takeProgressive
a worthy idea
Simple
disciplines
made
you’ve made,
and use it as a tool to do differently in the future. And don’t spend a
consistently over time
great deal time doing even that!—the future is a far better tool than the past.
The future is your most powerful tool and your best friend. Devote some
Responsibility/Discipline
serious, •
focused time
and effort into designing a crystal-clear picture of where
• Value Driven
le
bwe’ll
you’re going. In the second part of this book,
take a look at specific ways
rt a
o
f
LTH
m
o
to help you do exactly that. For now,
I’ll
just
say
this:
when you do have
EA a clear
es c
H
m
o
c
e
b
y
l
r
a
e
ortableand
omffuture
ncthe
What’s uof
picture
consciously put time every day into letting yourself

NT

The Slight Edge
be drawn forward by that future, it will pull you through whatever friction and
static you encounter in the present—and whatever tugging and clutching you
may feel from the past.
One last thing about past and future—and I have saved the best for last.

You can’t change the past. You can change the
future. Would you rather be influenced by something
you can’t change, or by something you can?
Where Are You Headed?

+ you tell me please, which way I ought to go from
Would
here?”
depends a good deal on where you want
Future
L “That
to Igo,” said the Cat. “I don’t much care where—” said old
TIME
Alice.
said p.72
F “Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,”
theECat. “—so long as I get somewhere,” Alice added as
Past “Oh, you’re sure to do that,” said the
an _
explanation.
Cat, “if you only walk long enough.
— Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

Slight Edge Life Paths
5% SUCCESS

EASY TO DO
Simple disciplines made
consistently over time

eco
W h a t’ s un c o m f o r t a b l e e a r ly b

m es c

A

N

te

r

• Responsibility/Discipline
• Value Driven

C
ES

Progressive realization of
a worthy idea

la

o

r
mfo

ta

bl

e

FI
N

9

106

PHILOSOPHY  ATTITUDE – ACTIONS – RESULTS – LIFESTYLE
W h at ’ s c o m f o r t a b l e e ar l y b e

comes

BUSINESS
PER
DE SON
VE
LO AL
PM
E

RE

NT

SH

N

TIO
LA

unc
om
for
ta
bl
e

r
te
la

• Blame/Neglect
• Entitled

H

ALT

HE

S

IP

EASY NOT TO DO
Simple errors in judgement
made over time

95% FAILURE
Lasts a lifetime

“Where I Could Be”

Two Life Paths 107
On which side of the Slight Edge curve are you standing right now? Which
way are you headed? Are you one of the five-percenters, one of those individuals
living on the success curve and going up—or are you among the great majority,
the ninety-five percenters on the failure curve and sliding down?
Not sure? Perhaps, in the middle, you say? Sorry, there is no middle. You
are either going up or going down. The early part of both curves are fairly flat,
so it can certainly look like you’re moving along on a nice, even keel, heading
neither up nor down. But appearances can be deceiving. (And usually are.) In a
constantly and rapidly changing world like ours, you simply cannot remain the
same as you were yesterday. You are in motion—you have no choice in that.
But in which direction? You have total choice in that.
You are either improving or diminishing in personal and professional value.
Your relationships are growing deeper and richer, or growing more stale and
distant. You are learning more and more about the truths of life, or slipping
deeper and deeper into denial about the truths of life. You are building your
long-term security and financial freedom, or dismantling it. And your health is
building day by day ... or ebbing slowly away.
There is no treading water in life, no running in place, because everything is
in motion. If you’re not improving, enriching, building, unfolding, if you’re not
adding assets to your personal and professional value every day—then you’re
headed down the curve.
So, let’s take an honest look at your life. Where are you right now?
Let’s take an honest look at your health.
Are you building it every day? The way you eat, the way you exercise, the
kind of schedule you keep, the ways in which you take care of yourself—are all
these building a greater feeling of health and vibrancy every day? Or does it
feel like you’re making more and more withdrawals from your life-energy bank
account, and the balance is steadily decreasing?
Is your health on the success curve or failure curve?
Let’s take an honest look at your personal development.
Are you learning more about yourself, about the world around you, and
about how life works every day? Are you learning new skills and sharpening old
ones? Are you becoming a more capable person, one more interesting to know
and valuable to be around? Or is your character being gradually etched with the
age-lines of disappointment, disillusionment, boredom and bitterness?
Is your personal development on the success curve or the failure curve?
Let’s take an honest look at your relationships.

108

The Slight Edge
Is the number of friends in your life, people with whom you stay in
touch, with whom you share meaningful exchanges and mutually enriching
experiences, growing larger every year? If you are married, and you were to
describe your marriage as a plant, would it be a plant that is growing taller,
riper, fuller and richer with each passing year? What about your family—
children, parents, brothers, sisters and others? Are they growing deeper and
richer or more distant and shallower?
Are your relationships on the success curve or the failure curve?
Let’s take an honest look at your finances.
Are you building assets and putting money into a long-term plan that will
create true financial freedom? Is your net worth growing larger each year?
Are you living within your means and investing a portion of your income
into a program that will build equity for you over the years, growing dollar by
dollar and picking up momentum through the power of compounding interest so
that, like a snowball rolling down a wintry hill, it will have gathered tremendous
financial mass in the years when you need it most?
Or are you living on credit, on borrowed money as well as borrowed time,
running your coffers empty and storing up debt instead of equity, digging
yourself deeper and deeper into a hole that grows only harder to escape?
Are your finances on the success curve or the failure curve?
Let’s take an honest look at your life itself.
What kind of impact is your life having on the world around you? How is
the world different as a result of your being here? After you leave this world,
what will you leave behind as a legacy and how will people remember you? When
you add together your career and all your professional accomplishments, your
relationships and all your personal accomplishments, your sense of connection
with nature, humanity and God, how would you describe the overall value or
meaning of your life? And is that sense growing stronger, deeper, richer, more
powerful every day, month and year?
Is your life on the success curve or the failure curve?
Be honest about all of this. Do as Shakespeare’s Polonius tells his son
Laertes to do:

This above all, to thine own self be true; and it must
follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be
false to any man.
— William Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act 1, Scene 3

Two Life Paths 109
If you don’t tell the truth about where you really are in your life—right
now—then you’re cheating yourself out of an extraordinary opportunity.

Because right now, this very minute, can be the time
you look back on as the moment your life changed
for the better—forever!
Life is not a practice session; there’s no dress rehearsal. This is it. This is for
real. So, play straight and true with yourself. Take a look at your life and tell the
truth about where you really are at.
Do this exercise with me right now. Take a pencil (not a pen—remember,
everything changes) and put a check in the UP or DOWN box next to each area
of your life as listed below. Which way are you going?
					 UP 		DOWN
Your health 				______ 		______
Your personal development 		

______ 		

______

Your relationships 			

______ 		

______

Your finances 			

______ 		

______

Your life itself 			

______ 		

______

Where are you? Which side of the line do you fall on in each area of your life?
If you have more “down” checks than “up,” I have two things to say: the first
is thank you for being honest! And the second is, don’t worry, you’re not alone.
Remember, gravity has been pulling you down since day one. Remember that
you’ve heard eight no’s for every yes, and eleven negative comments for every
positive one! And those no’s and negatives are compounding with the force of the
water hyacinth, threatening to cover the surface of your mind with a suffocating
weed that blots out all possibility of sunlight reaching the life that’s wanting to
thrive there. The one or two “no’s” didn’t kill you—but those 40,000 can sure do
some serious damage to your sense of possibility.
That’s the Slight Edge working against you.

The Good News
Now, here’s the good news: where you are right now is poised in the present,
with the past stretching behind you and the future lying ahead. You cannot
change the past. You can absolutely change the future.

Are you heading up, or heading down? Right at
this moment, at this exact juncture in your life, you

110

The Slight Edge

can answer the question either way. At any moment
in your life, you can choose to change which side of
that curve you’re on.
The good news is the wealthy man’s third gift: you have a choice.
Where you’ve been heading is not necessarily where you will be heading
after you turn this page, or put down this book, or wake up tomorrow morning.
The past does not equal the future. In fact, you cannot look in both directions at
once. You can look down, or you can look up; you can look back, or you can look
forward; you can look in the rearview mirror, or at the highway ahead.
Step onto the upper curve, the path of success, and you will put any area
of life—your health, your finances, your relationships, your family life, your
career, your spiritual health, your sense of accomplishment and fulfillment and
purpose—on track within a few years.
If you don’t step onto the upper curve? Failing is something that will take the
rest of your life. Failure, unchecked by a choice to change, is a life-long condition.
What matters now is your awareness of how the Slight Edge operates in your
life and your understanding that you have what you need right now to change
that. All the information you need is already out there—and, right here. You’re
already doing the actions. All you need to do is choose to have to them serve and
empower you—and keep on choosing.
In my line of work, I talk a lot about success in financial terms. But genuine
success is a far greater issue than purely financial health. A genuinely successful
life means your health, your family relationships, your career, your spirituality,
your sense of fulfillment, your legacy and the impact you have on the world.
It’s all these things and more. And the best thing about genuine success is
that it spreads! Success in any one of these areas begins

to affect all the others, too. Improve your health
and you improve your relationships; work on your
personal development and you have an impact on
your career. Everything affects everything else.

If you are having a hard time making progress in one area—say in business—
take action to make a small positive change in an unrelated area. Start taking a
walk around the block, organize that junk drawer that has been haunting you.
Feeling successful in one area will provide you with renewed confidence and
energy to continue on your journey of attaining that other big goal.

Two Life Paths 111

The Ripple Effect
When you create positive improvements in your life, a positive ripple
effect is created all around you. You become a better relative, friend, business
associate, and community member, which in turns creates a bigger positive
impact on society than simply the change created in you. When you reach out
and positively affect another person through your interactions and words, you
create a slight change in that person, who is then more likely to reach out and
positively affect someone else. Simply put, one touches another, who touches
another, who touches another. You are constantly creating a ripple effect by the
way you affect your environment. It can either be a positive ripple or a negative
ripple. The choice is always yours.
Take action now to start casting your positive ripples. Do you have every
resource you’ll need to accomplish everything you want in life ... right now? No.
Can you put your hands on all those resources right now? No.
But can you make a choice—and come up with one penny?
That’s all it takes to start.

Key Points for Chapter 7
The truth is, everything is curved. There is no true straight line; everything is
changing—including your life. You are on a journey, your life path. That path is a
curve. You’re curving either upward or downward.
Wherever you may be in your own life, understanding the Slight Edge gives you
the tools to start fresh—right now!—and place yourself firmly on the upper curve.

112

The Slight Edge

How to Handle Blame and Responsibility

a life of blame.
ok, I tended to lead
Before reading this bo
never my fault,
s
wa
it
,
y responsibility
I never accepted an
t prevented
e’s, or something tha
always someone els
ok, I realized I
. After reading the bo
me from succeeding
th of failure,
pa
my
ke: continue on
ma
to
ion
cis
de
a
d
ha
late in life to
es it seems like it’s too
or change. Sometim
late. You have
lize now it is NEVER too
change things. I rea
to dig deep,
l
ua
It’s up to the individ
re!
he
ew
som
rt
sta
to
better in the
past, and strive to be
look at things from the
simple changes.
future with just a few

kalb, IL

—Charleigh Vigil, De

I was an alcoholic and this was taking over every ounce of
goodness
and skillfulness I once had. Fortunately, destiny had a better
plan
for me. I made the decision to fight my enemy. I enrolled myself
in a
rational sobriety outpatient facility. At the same time, anothe
r positive
occurrence happened: I was introduced to The Slight Edge.
The simple
principles described in the book were an absolute revelation
for me. By
understanding how I had let my worst enemy work the magic
of the Slight
Edge to my disadvantage, I was able to take the appropriate
baby steps
necessary to change the curve of my life! Today, I am free and
happy.
I wake up in the morning energized, I am aware of which steps
are
necessary to achieve my goals and I walk along a path which
leads me,
a day at a time, to fulfillment.

—Michele Tremblay-Suepke, Tacoma, WA

PART TWO

Mastering Your Life

CHAPTER 8

Mastering the Slight Edge

It resists definition yet can be instantly recognized. It comes
in many variations, yet follows certain unchanging laws. It
brings rich rewards, yet it is not really a goal or a destination
but rather a process, or journey. We call this journey mastery
and tend to assume that it requires a special ticket available
only to those born with exceptional abilities. But mastery is
not reserved for the supertalented or even for those who are
fortunate enough to have gotten an early start. It’s available
to anyone who is willing to get on the path and stay on it—
regardless of age, sex or experience.
The trouble is that we have few, if any, maps to guide us on the
journey or even to show us how to find the path. The modern
world, in fact, can be viewed as a prodigious conspiracy
against mastery. We’re continually bombarded with promises of
immediate gratification, instant success, and fast, temporary
relief, all of which lead in exactly the wrong direction ...
— George Leonard, Mastery

Mastery is not some vaulted, lofty place that only the elite few ever land.
The pursuit of any aim, goal or dream—personal, professional, spiritual, in
any area—is a Slight Edge journey of continuous improvement, learning and
refinement. But mastery is not an exalted state that lies at

the end of the path; it is a state of mind that lies at the

116

The Slight Edge

very beginning. According to George Leonard, author of Education and
Ecstasy and The Way of Aikido, mastery is the act of setting your foot on the path.
As a fifth dan black belt in Aikido and an award-winning writer on
education, fitness and personal development, Leonard has more than a passing
acquaintance with mastery, and what this master has to say about the subject is
remarkably liberating.
There are no shortcuts, he says, no special tickets needed, and none available
even if you wanted one. You don’t need to be born with exceptional abilities to
enter into mastery, nor is it reserved for the supertalented. You don’t even need
to have gotten an early start.
The upward journey of success on the Slight Edge curve is available
to anyone who is willing to get on the path and stay on it. But it’s only

by being immersed in the process, the day-by-day
progression, that you will come to know the road.

That’s how you will acquire and refine the skills and awareness you’ll need to
master the Slight Edge and, therefore, master your success and your life.
All that’s required is taking the first step.

Baby Steps
When you were a tiny child, you made your way around your world on your
hands and knees, crawling. Everyone around you was walking, and one day you
got it into your little head that maybe you could give that a try. And once you had
that thought, you had to give it a try. It was simply the next frontier; there was no
way you weren’t going to master it.
So, step by step—literally!—you worked on developing the skills you needed
to walk.
You grabbed onto something above you and pulled yourself upright. You
stood up, holding on to a playpen or chair or some big stuffed animal. You were
wobbly and unsure. You let go, either on purpose or by accident, and it didn’t
matter which, because the result was the same—Crash! You fell down. And then,
either right away, or later that day, or the next day (and it didn’t matter when),
you tried it again. And then you tried it again, and again ... until eventually, you
stood up all by yourself—no hands.
Then you took a step—and in that step, according to George Leonard, you
assumed the mantle of mastery ... even if external appearances didn’t entirely
confirm your new status. (Remember, appearances can be deceiving—and
almost always are.)

Mastering the Slight Edge 117
So here you are, just completing your very first step. Now, you know that
the big people you’ve been watching go around taking one step after another.
You’ve watched them do it: right foot, left foot, right foot, left ... so you try. You
complete that first, tentative, epic-making step and get ready to swing into the
next one—and then, Crash!
Try again. And again. And again. After days of side-stepping around the
coffee table, awkwardly bringing one little foot out from behind the other while
you hold onto Mom’s or Dad’s fingers, you eventually take your first sequence of
two steps ... then three, and four, and ... all alone ... all by yourself ... and to the
encouraging cheers and applause of your proud family—baby steps ... one at a
time ... and you’re walking!
In the process of learning to walk, did you spend more time falling down or
standing up? If you were anything like most babies, you failed (fell) far more than
you succeeded (walked). It didn’t matter: you were on the path of mastery.
Did you ever have the thought of quitting? Did you ever say to yourself, You
know, it looks like maybe I’m just not cut out for walking ... oh well. I guess I’ll just
have to crawl for the rest of my life—which really isn’t all that bad, when you stop
and think about it. I’m sure I’ll get used to it ... ? Of course not. You were on the
path of mastery. You were already a master—now it was only a matter of your
walking skills catching up.
Constantly falling down was really uncomfortable—it hurt!—and you probably
looked pretty silly lying there on the floor like a beetle on its back ... but you kept
at it anyway. Why? Because successful people do what unsuccessful people are not
willing to do—and all babies are successful. All babies are masters; we’re designed
that way. All babies instinctively understand the Slight Edge. We only let go of our
natural pull towards success, our mastery, over the course of those 40,000 no’s.
Are there any situations in your life today where you’ve given up and decided
to keep crawling rather than go for what you really want, what you truly deserve?
Have you lost the ability to make up a goal, go for it and get it? Why don’t you do
what you did when you were just a year old?
The answer is both simple and sad: somewhere along the way, you lost
faith. You became too grown-up to take baby steps,

too sure you would never succeed to let yourself fail
a few times first. You gave up on the universal truth that simple little

disciplines, done again and again over time, would move the biggest mountains.
You forgot what you used to know about the Slight Edge. You stepped off the
path of mastery.

118

The Slight Edge
There is something treacherous about letting go of that childlike willingness
to try and try again. Something insidiously dangerous about buying into the
idea, “that’ll never work for me.” It is this: settling for less, settling for failure
and giving up on baby steps soon becomes a habit. The first time you give up,
it’s painful. But the more you give up, the easier and easier it gets—and success
recedes further and further from your grasp.
Can you guess why? That’s right: it’s the Slight Edge—working against you.
Life is heavy ... welcome to the ninety-five percent!
But as always, all we need to do is turn the coin over to find the good news
here: it is just as easy to step into the habit of succeeding, as it is to slip into the
habit of failing. The longer you live, the easier it can get.

And you can step back onto the path of mastery
any time you want.
Wanting

There is one quality which one must possess to win,
and that is definiteness of purpose, the knowledge of
what one wants, and a burning desire to possess it.
— Napoleon Hill, Think and Grow Rich

We all have visions of the way we’d like things to be that are different from
the way they are. It could be something as simple as wishing we weighed ten
pounds less, or something as far-reaching as wishing we could feed the millions
of children around the world who go to bed hungry every night.
When I sat having my shoes polished in the Phoenix airport, I couldn’t have
stopped myself from having a vision of the shoeshine woman’s success if I’d tried.
I wanted her to be successful, so much that it ached.
It’s that ache that we need look at now for a moment, the ache of wanting.
Having a dream is not always a matter of all roses and sweetness; ambitions,
aspirations and desires can be uncomfortable, even painful.
The word “want” has two meanings. It can mean you desire something; it can
also mean you lack something. And in a way, those aren’t really two meanings;
they’re two sides of the same meaning. We tend to desire what we lack, and lack
what we desire.
That means your dreams can be painful. Letting yourself become aware
of what it is that you desire, but do not presently have, means experiencing the
“lack” side of the coin as well as the “desire” side. It means becoming more fully

ES

C

r

Closing the Gap

W h a t’ s un c o m f o r t a b l e e a r ly b

eco m e

s co

r
mfo

ta

N

A

e

N

bl

FI

• Value Driven

H

ALT

HE

TIO
LA

RE

When you took
an honest
look– RESULTS
at your– life
back in the
previous chapter,
BUSINESS
PHILOSOPHY
ATTITUDE
– ACTIONS
LIFESTYLE
P
E
W h at ’ s c
om fo r t a
rating
yourself
asble e
being
on
the
success curve or failure curve
ar l y b
ec o
DE RSin
O different areas,
mes u
VE NAL
nco
LO shows that as
mf you are now. The diagram
you were painting a picture of where
ort
PM
ab
EN
T in your
Blame/Neglect
point A, •
and where
you could be, your le
vision of what’s possible for you
• Entitled
r
te
la

life, as point B.
To the extent that there is a gap between points A and B, there is a natural
tension between
EASY those
NOT two,
TO like
DOholding a magnet near a piece of iron. You can
Simple errors in judgement
95% FAILURE
feel the magnet made
tugging
your dreams (B) tugging at
over at
timethe iron—and you can feel
Lasts a lifetime
your present circumstances (A).
S

IP

SH

N

5

te

4

aware of what you don’t have. It means staring at your present reality with a
sober eye and refusing to kid yourself. Noticing that you’re not where you want
to be can be +
uncomfortable.
Future
L
Wanting hurts.
old
I
Here’s an interesting thing: if putting voice to your fondest
dreams
can make
p.72
TIME
F
you a little uncomfortable, it can also make everyone around you uncomfortable,
E
and often far _
morePast
so. Tell your five closest friends about your biggest ambition,
and watch how many of them squirm! Why? Because showing them your want
(desire) also reminds them of their want (lack).
This is one reason that when you are formulating goals and creating a vision
for your future, it’s important to be careful whom you share them with. It’s
Slight Edge Life Paths
natural to share your enthusiasm with everyone around you—and it’s also useful
5% SUCCESS
Progressive
realization
to remember
thatTO
people
raining
on of
your parade. When
EASY
DOoften tend to respond by
a worthy idea
Simple disciplines made
they do, it’s
not outover
oftime
malice or the conscious desire to blunt your excitement.
consistently
More often, it’s simply a form of self-defense. They’d rather not hear about the
vision you•have,
because it reminds them of the one they’ve lost.
Responsibility/Discipline
la

ld
.39

Mastering the Slight Edge 119

“Where I Could Be”
“Where I Am”

8

A

B

120

The Slight Edge
Tension is uncomfortable. That’s why it sometimes makes people uncomfortable
to hear about how things could be. One of the reasons Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr.’s famous “I have a dream” speech made such a huge impact on the world and
carved such a vivid place in our cultural memory is that it made the world of
August 1963 very uncomfortable. John Lennon sang his vision of a more peaceful
world in the song “Imagine”; within the decade, he was shot to death. Visions
and visionaries make people uncomfortable.
These are of course especially dramatic examples, but the same principle
applies to the personal dreams and goals of people we’ve never heard of. The
same principle applies to everyone, including you and me.
Let’s say you have a brother, or sister or old friend, with whom you had a
falling out years ago. You wish you had a better relationship, that you talked more
often, that you shared more personal experiences and conversations together.
Between where you are today, and where you can imagine being, there is a gap.
Can you feel it?
Or let’s say you are a hard worker and make a pretty good income, but have
no solid retirement plan and don’t know how you’ll be able to live comfortably
when you reach your late sixties. There’s how you’d like to be living at age sixtyeight, and how you’re worried you may end up living at age sixty-eight if things go
the way they’re going. Between those two, there’s a gap. Can you feel it?
Do you have any health or fitness goals? Career goals? Goals for your kids?
Dreams of living somewhere else, of doing something else? Each of those images
you have, of how things could be but at the moment are not, creates a gap with
your present reality.
Most people, when confronted by problems larger than or of a different sort
than they’re already handling, immediately feel defeated or thrown off course.
Most tend to see larger or different problems as negatives, and infect their own
lives with negativity. What they don’t realize is this philosophy: The size of the
problem determines the size of the person.
You can gauge the limitations of a person’s life by the size of the problems that
get him or her down. You can measure the impact a person’s

life has by the size of the problems he or she solves.

If the size of the problems you solve is, “I put the cans in the bottom of the
bag, and put the bread on top,” as a grocery store bagger, that’s the level of your
problem solving and that’s the level of your pay. If you can solve big problems,
you can graduate to big pay—because the size of your income will be determined
by the size of the problems you solve, too!

Mastering the Slight Edge 121
What most people call a “problem” is simply a gap, an open space between
point A and point B. And if you keep an open mind, it’s an open space you
can bridge.
Now, here is the reason I’ve spent time describing and explaining this gap:
That gap can work against you or it can work for you.
The gap between A and B cannot last forever. It has to resolve, and it will,
one way or the other. It’s a law of nature, and there’s nothing you can do to stop
it. But you do have a choice in how it resolves.
One way to resolve the tension is to move your point A (the way things
are today) steadily closer and closer to point B. Let yourself be drawn by the
magnet of your dreams, pulled along by the future. Remember what pulls those
who dwell in the failure curve? The past. And what pulls people who live on the
success curve? The future.
People who live with huge, vivid, clearly articulated dreams are pulled along
toward those dreams with such force, they become practically unstoppable.
What made people like Martin Luther King Jr., Gandhi or Mother Teresa,
Edison or IBM’s Thomas Watson, Wilberforce or Lincoln such forces of nature
that nothing could stand in their way, no matter what the odds or obstacles? It
was not some magic in their character, though they certainly became people of
unusual character along the way. It was the power of their dreams. The vision
each of these men and women held created a magnetic force against which no
opposition could stand.
Again, I’m using dramatic examples of famous people, but the exact same
thing occurs with people you and I have never heard of, everyday people who are
not at all famous, but simply have dreams they care about and keep alive every
day. That’s the force you can harness in the pursuit of your own dreams.
What about the other direction? I said there were two ways that tension can
resolve, and the other way is the one that works against you. If you don’t close the
gap by moving your present circumstance (A) constantly toward your goals and
dreams (B), how else can you let the tension resolve?

Quit dreaming.
Just let go of all your dreams, goals, ambitions and aspirations. Settle for
less. Make point B disappear, just delete it, and—poof!—the tension is gone. And
that, sadly, is the choice that the ninety-five percent who travel the failure curve
eventually make.

122

The Slight Edge
It’s not hard to understand why so many people make that second choice.
After all, when you’re standing here at point A, gazing off into the distance at
point B, it’s easy to be intimidated by how far away it looks. People don’t even
want to set foot on the path if they don’t think they can make it to the end. Why
even try? I mean, if the mountain’s that huge, why take the first step? I’ll probably
never make it anyway ... When the journey seems daunting, “easy not to do” can
be a lot more appealing than “easy to do”!
But remember, you have to go one direction or the other; you can’t stand
still. Everything is constantly changing. There are only two possibilities. Either
you let go of where you are and get to where you could be, or you hang onto
where you are and give up where you could be. You are either going for your
dreams or giving up your dreams. Stretching for what you could be, or settling
for what you are. There is simply no in-between. Remember, this is the Slight
Edge—and doing nothing means going down.
It’s your choice.

The Deceptive Majority

All truth passes through three stages. First, it is
ridiculed. Second, it is violently opposed. Third, it
is accepted as being self-evident.
— Arthur Schopenhauer

Those two Slight Edge curves, the success curve and the failure curve, run
parallel to each other for a long time. The two paths may be so close together
that it’s almost impossible for most people even to see the distinction between
them. Then, all of a sudden, they veer away from each other, the success curve
shooting up like an eagle and the failure curve plummeting downward like a
stock market crash.
The people living on top, who take responsibility, live a life that is in some
ways uncomfortable. Successful people do what unsuccessful people are not
willing to do, and that often means living outside the limits of one’s comfort zone.
When you’re one out of twenty, you’re always going to be going in the opposite
direction from the other nineteen.
The people on the other side are comfortable; they’re with the masses. Their
lives are more comfortable early on—but become more uncomfortable later on.
Suddenly, late in life, they find they don’t have the finances, don’t have the health,
no longer have the relationships, and their lives become very uncomfortable.

Mastering the Slight Edge 123
Those on the success curve, by contrast, end up far more comfortable later
on, because they have the finances, the health, the relationships, the successes.
This means changing your thinking about the comfort zone. It’s a change in
philosophy. It means embracing living uncomfortably in

order to attain a life that is genuinely comfortable—
not deceptively comfortable.

The quote from Schopenhauer is a brilliant insight to the nature of the
majority. The majority always let the first and second phases pass them by and
wait until a truth is self-evident before signing on. What Schopenhauer is saying
is the key to success is to identify things that are going to become self-evident
before they’re self-evident! Or to put it even more simply: find out what the
majority is doing and do the opposite, which can be uncomfortable.
Of course, you have to apply some intelligence; you can’t expect things
to work just because they’re in opposition to the majority. But the chances are
excellent that when you step up onto the success curve, you will be stepping out
alone. Like Wilberforce, Edison, Lincoln and Gandhi.
Do the opposite of the majority. Risk being the one, not one of the nineteen.
Will people criticize you? Of course. But have you ever seen a

statue erected for a critic? We don’t build statues
for the ninety-five percent: we build them for the
five percent.
What I Learned from Funerals

At one point in my life, when I entered the corporate world and went to work
for Texas Instruments, I was all ready to work my way up in management, but
life had other plans for me. I showed up for work and they put me in sales.
I was horrified. I didn’t want to be a salesperson. I hated sales. I didn’t think
I could do it. I knew I couldn’t do it. What I had was not fear of rejection; it was
terror of rejection. I knew what I would do—I would quit this job and go back to
graduate school.
But successful people do what unsuccessful people are not willing to do. I
was up against the wall: I had to do it and I knew it.
For my first sales call, I pored over the customer files and found the tiniest, most
insignificant account I could: a tiny little drugstore in Gainesville, Florida. I figured
that if I was going to make a mess, I might as well do as little damage as possible.
I drove for two and a half hours to arrive at that store, white-knuckled with
fear. I parked and sat in the lot for a good half hour, leaning my face into the air

124

The Slight Edge
conditioner vents (with the AC turned up full blast) and sweating buckets. I was
terrified. Staying in that car would have been the easiest thing in the world to do
right then. And on some level, even though I had not yet articulated the Slight
Edge philosophy in my life, I knew that this simple little error, compounded over
time, would rob me of all my dreams.
As I had prepared myself to go on this first sales call, I had been literally
praying for help, and as so often happens when you ask a question in all sincerity,
an answer came. In this case, it came in the form of an article I happened to read
in a magazine.
The article was about funerals, and it informed me that at the average
funeral, about ten people cry.
I couldn’t believe it. Ten people? That’s it? You mean, I go through my entire
life, spend years and years going through all these trials and tribulations and
achievements and joys and heartbreaks—and at the end of it, there are only ten
people who care enough to cry?
I went on to the next paragraph. It got worse.
Once those ten (or fewer) people had yanked their hankies and honked
their noses and my funeral was over, the number one factor that would
determine how many people would go on from the funeral to attend the actual
burial would be ... the weather. (The weather?!) If it happened to be raining, it
said, fifty percent of the people who attend my funeral would decide not to go
to my burial after all.
I really couldn’t believe it. You mean, I’m lying there, at the grand conclusion of
everything I’ve ever said and done, of everything I call my life, in those final moments
when my entire life is called to account and acknowledged and memorialized by those
nearest and dearest to me, those whose lives I’ve most deeply and profoundly touched ...
and half the congregation checks out halfway through because of the weather?!
At first, this really bummed me out.
And then, it was liberating.
You know what? I thought. I don’t give a damn what anybody thinks of what
I’m doing any more. If the odds are that iffy as to whether or not they even cry at my
funeral, and chances are fifty-fifty that they duck out before I’m planted if the sky
happens to cry for me more than the people do ... then why am I spending so much
time worrying about what they’re thinking now?
Why would I be afraid of rejection? Why would I be concerned about what
the majority thinks? Why would I be worried about what the ninety-five percent
say, think, or do?

Mastering the Slight Edge 125
Facing some truths about one’s own death can also bring one face to face
with some important truths about one’s life. Reading that article enlarged my
comfort zone, and gave me an edge of courage—just a tiny edge, but an edge I
hadn’t had before. A Slight Edge.
I finally mustered what courage I could, turned off the car, went inside and gave
what I am convinced to this day was the worst presentation in the history of sales.
They did not buy a thing. In that sense, it was a total failure—but when I got back in
my car, I was elated. I had blown the sales call, and had achieved a victory in my life.
A few days later, I happened to be thinking about that article as I sat in my car,
stopped in traffic. Just then, I saw why we were all stopped: a funeral procession
went by. It took less than a minute because it contained only a few cars.
As traffic slowly started moving again, I thought, That person lived his or her
entire life worrying about what other people thought ...
And it suddenly hit me. Who has long funeral processions? At whose
funerals do thousands cry? For whom do the millions mourn? For those who will
do what others are not willing to do. For the people for whom we erect statues.
Martin Luther King Jr., Gandhi, Mother Teresa, Lincoln.
Gigantic funerals are held and great crowds, sometimes entire nations, mourn
for those people who spent their lives not worrying about what others thought.

Key Points of Chapter 8
Mastery is not some vaulted, lofty place that only the elite few ever land.
The pursuit of any aim, goal or dream—personal, professional, spiritual, in
any area—is a Slight Edge journey of continuous improvement, learning and
refinement. But mastery is not an exalted state that lies at the end of the path; it
is a state of mind that lies at the very beginning. Mastery is the act of setting your
foot on the path.

126

The Slight Edge

Shortly after my baby girl was born, I reluctantly turned to a state-run WIC program
that provided milk for her—milk I couldn’t afford to buy myself. It was a clear and
defining moment in my life. I was in early 20’s and my life was spiraling downwards
fast in all categories: finances, family, fitness, faith, friends, fun and freedom.
Where I was in my life was based entirely upon the decisions I’d made over the
last five years, and nearly every one of them lead me down the path of gradual
decline. Deep down inside I knew I had to move from a life of entitlement to a
life of responsibility.
One decision I made was critical. Every day while I was taking care of my baby
girl, I would have a TV channel called The People’s Network playing in the
background. Whenever I fell off track, I would hear someone on that channel
share some wisdom, some insights that helped get me get back on track.
Around that time I attended an event where Jeff Olson shared the Slight Edge
concept, that he said had served him well in life, and then added, “I think it
will do you well.” I remember the words clearly. He shared how it’s in the last
20 percent of the time we invest in a discipline, when all the rewards come. I
needed something to believe in, so that day I bought into his belief in the Slight
Edge philosophy.
I’ll never forget those days of struggling—fall off track, get back on track, fall off
track, get back on track. Realizing I was the project, I went to work on me. I read
and applied what I learned. I went to work and I did my best. I applied long-term
vision and delayed gratification.
I knew in order to be successful, I had to do what others were not willing do to
themselves. If I became a success, it would be because of me. If I became a failure,
it would be because of me. I couldn’t blame anyone, I wouldn’t and I didn’t.
Was it easy? No. Was it worth it? ‘ You bet!
Over time I started to hit the magical “20 percent Slight Edge tipping point”
mark in my finances, with my family, fitness, faith, friends, even fun and
freedom followed.
Every decision I made over the next five years was a Slight-Edge decision, but
this time it was a decision in simple disciplines, not simple errors in judgment. The
majority of my decisions were now leading me down the path of growth.
I became living proof that the Slight Edge works. Since that time I’ve taught the
Slight Edge philosophy to audiences in over twenty countries. I created a Slight
Edge chart for myself, the same chart my daughter used to keep her on track to
earning a black belt in the martial arts, the same one she used to develop the
habit of reading 15 pages of a personal growth book a day, the same one she
used to develop powerful critical thinking skills.
My daughter recently turned 18 and just left on a 90-day trip to Italy. I’m thrilled
for her, and a bit sad. I miss her. And I know she’ll be fine, after all, the Slight Edge
philosophy is now part of her DNA. She also has a 3-year young sister. And yes,
thanks to the Slight Edge, I can afford the milk this time around.

—Art Jonack, Houston TX

CHAPTER 9

Faces of the Slight Edge

The highest good is like water.
Water gives life to the ten thousand things and yet
does not compete with them.
It flows in places that the mass of people detest and
therefore is it close to the Way.
— Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching

The Slight Edge is simple and constant. At the same time, the more you
understand it and the more you become familiar with it, the more you will come
to recognize its influence in your life in many forms and under many disguises.
It is the irresistible force delivered by the tidal wash that polishes the sharp
edges of a rocky reef to porcelain smoothness; it is as ever-present in all aspects
of life as the water molecule is in biology.
It is the force hiding within the music that “soothes the savage breast.”
Writing about love, the Apostle Paul said that it is a force that “endures all things
and conquers all things,” and within the universal human solvent of love, it’s not
hard to recognize the power of the Slight Edge. Mark Twain wrote, “Against the
assault of laughter, nothing can stand.” That is the power of the Slight Edge.
There are several faces of the Slight Edge I want to point out to you because
they each represent a power that, once you recognize it in your life, you can
harness in the pursuit of your dreams. They are momentum; completion; habit;
reflection; and celebration.

128

The Slight Edge

Harness the Power of Momentum
Who won the race—the tortoise or the hare? We all know the answer to that
one. Yet we live in a world where most everyone has come to expect instant this
and instant that, and if we don’t get the results we’re after fast and faster, we quit.
Get rich quick. The fast lane. That fellow standing in front of the microwave
muttering, “Hurry uppp, hurry uppp ... ” Fast, faster, fastest is a strategy that
will eventually take you down the Slight Edge curve.
M.I.T. professor Peter Senge puts this beautifully in his best-selling business
book, The Fifth Discipline—The Art & Practice of the Learning Organization:

Virtually all natural systems, from ecosystems to
animals to organizations, have intrinsically optimal
rates of growth. The optimal rate is far less than
the fastest possible growth. When growth becomes
excessive—as it does in cancer—the system itself
will seek to compensate by slowing down; perhaps
putting the organization’s survival at risk in the
process.
— Peter Senge, The Fifth Discipline

Have you ever witnessed something or someone that grew too fast? A
business that expanded too rapidly and then self-destructed? A rock star, movie
star or sports star who became a shooting star and went BOA—Burned Out on
Arrival? Faster can end up being slower; too fast often puts the system’s (or the
person’s) survival at risk.
Dr. Senge talks about “intrinsically optimal rates of growth”; your

optimal rate of growth is always served best by a
step-by-step approach of constant, never-ending
improvement, which lays solid foundations and
builds upon them over and over. The Slight Edge is your
optimal rate of growth. Simple disciplines compounded over time. That’s how
the tortoise won; that’s how you get to be a winner, too.
Having said that let me ask this: What is the real point of the story of the
tortoise and the hare? Altogether now: Slow and steady wins the race, right? But
notice something here: the point is not that there’s any special virtue to moving
slowly. There’s nothing inherently good about slowness, and it’s just as possible
to move too slowly as to move too quickly.
The key word in the Aesop moral is not “slow”—it’s steady.

Steady wins the race. That’s the truth of it.

Faces of the Slight Edge 129
The fable of the tortoise and the hare is really about the remarkable power of
momentum. A body at rest tends to stay at rest—and a body in motion tends to
remain in motion. That’s why your activity is so important. Once you’re in motion,
it’s easy to keep on keeping on. Once you stop, it’s hard to change from stop to go.

Be not afraid of going slowly;
be afraid only of standing still.
— Chinese proverb

I coach people how to build large businesses by doing very simple, easy-to-do
actions every day. I’ve found that it’s far more effective to take one businessbuilding action every day for a week, than to take seven, or ten, or even two dozen,
all at once and then take the rest of the week off. People who do the first, week in
and week out, build a solid business; people who do the second, don’t—even if they
are actually doing a greater number of those business-building actions.
Why not? No momentum. After six days off, they have to start all over again,
getting themselves geared up and inspired to get back into action. It can take a
good amount of energy and initiative to get yourself started in a new activity—
but it takes far, far less to keep yourself doing it once you’ve started.
There’s another reason once a day is better than seven times, once a week: the
daily rhythm of the thing starts to change you. It becomes part of your routine, and
as it does, it becomes part of who you are. That doesn’t happen with a once-in-awhile, all-out effort.
Imagine taking a twenty-minute brisk walk in the morning, and then in the late
afternoon, working out on a home gym for another twenty minutes. Now imagine
that for a week, you did that every day. How would you feel at the end of the week?
Now instead, what if on that first day you had taken a 140-minute walk
(that’s over two hours!) and that afternoon, spent another 140 minutes on the
home gym—and then done nothing for the next six days?
Steady wins the race.
When you’re in motion, it’s also far easier to make positive changes in your
direction. It’s like steering a car: when the car’s sitting still, moving the wheel is
hard work, but when it’s moving, even at only 10 or 20 mph, turning is a breeze.
It’s a breeze because you’re already in the flow.

Go Slow to Go Fast
The Slight Edge is a flow, and it moves at its own pace, automatically homing
in on optimal growth rates. Part of understanding the Slight Edge is learning to

130

The Slight Edge
go with the flow. You can be as impatient as you like, but it

won’t bother the Slight Edge. It’s always moving at
its own optimal speed, with or without your consent,
whether you are aware of it moving or not. Dan Millman,

in the book Way of the Peaceful Warrior (which is my favorite book), said it best
when he said “ Let it go and Let it flow.”
To make the most of the Slight Edge flow, you’ll want to match the speed
of your growth and development to the natural progression of the Slight Edge.
That’s accomplished naturally by having a Slight Edge strategy.
It’s easy to stay active. It’s also easy not to. And if you stop, it won’t kill
you today—but, that simple error in judgment, compounded over time, will
absolutely destroy the getting of any goal you’re after.
Mary Kay Ash put this simply: “Give yourself something to work
toward constantly.”

Harness the Power of Completion
Another way you gather momentum and harness it to your advantage is by
practicing an activity called completion.
Are there any things that are incomplete in your life? Any unpaid bills? Have
you done your taxes? Did you borrow a book or tool you have yet to return? Is there
someone who needs to hear you say, “I love you,” or, “I’m sorry,” or, “Thank you—I
appreciate you”? Do you have any unfinished projects? Any unkept promises—
taking a weekend away with your spouse, or taking your kids somewhere special?
Are there any agreements or commitments you’ve left hanging?
Each and every incomplete thing in your life or work exerts a draining force
on you, sucking the energy of accomplishment and success out of you as surely
as a vampire stealing your blood.

Every incomplete promise, commitment and
agreement saps your strength, because it blocks your
momentum, inhibits your ability to move forward,
to progress and improve. Incomplete things keep
calling you back to the past to take care of them.

Here’s the unfortunate and powerfully destructive truth of being incomplete: it
keeps the past alive. Remember, people who live on the success curve are pulled by
the future, while those who dwell on the failure curve are pulled by the past. And a
surefire way to be forced to live as a prisoner of your past is to not complete things.
Is it easy to do? Yes ... —wait. Let’s consider that for a moment. No ... actually,

Faces of the Slight Edge 131
it’s not always easy to complete those incomplete things in life. Not when you’ve
got a truckload of them to take care of. That stack of incompletions can loom
larger than the Sears Tower. They can be absolutely overwhelming. Especially
when you realize that whatever might have been keeping you from completing
them in the first place—fear of confronting the issue, feeling intimidated or
overwhelmed by it, worrying it might be difficult or uncomfortable—well, that’s
been compounded by the Slight Edge, too!
That’s the Slight Edge working against you. That’s how the pile got so big to
begin with. And the truth is even those incompletions that seem difficult to do
would have been a lot easier to do when they first came up than they might be now.
Approaching that stack of undones with the Slight Edge in hand is not only the
best way to deal with them, it’s the only way you’ll ever deal with them. Take on those
incompletions in your life just as you took on learning to walk. Baby steps, one at a time,
letting the Slight Edge work for you to help you complete whatever needs completing.
Take on any one of your “incomplete” projects, one at a time. And if even that
one project seems like too huge a mountain to climb, rummage around its foothills
until you find an initial step you can take. The biggest meal is still eaten one bite
at a time. Think of the title of Art Williams’ best-seller, All You Can Do Is All You
Can Do, But All You Can Do Is Enough. So find something you can do, and do that.
Make a phone call. Write a letter. Give fifteen minutes to completing
something every day.
Read how The Slight Edge reader Valerie Thomas decided to tackle the
“incomplete” project of her basement:
I lived in a house with a huge unfinished basement that had 17 years’
worth of clothes items, boxes, equipment, toys, you name it all around;
there was one small path to walk to the back room to get to the washer and
dryer. Eventually, time came when I had to move from that house and I
thought I would never get to the basement. I cringed every time I thought
of it. However after learning and applying the concept of the slight edge,
I said that I would move/handle one bag or box every time I went to do
clothes or get food. Before I knew it, I saw light; it looked easy to handle
until eventually it was cleared out for a successful move.
What incomplete thing/project can you bring to completion?
Is it easy not to do? Absolutely. And if you don’t do it today, will it destroy
you? (You know the rest, so sing along ... )
Each time you do complete something, you get to move on with your luggage
a little lighter and a bit more spring in your step.

132

The Slight Edge

Harness the Power of Habit

Sow an act, reap a habit;
Sow a habit, reap a character;
Sow a character, reap a destiny.
— Anonymous (attributed to various)

We often take habits for granted. There are bad habits you try to break but
can’t, good habits you wish you had but don’t, annoying habits others have you
wish they didn’t, and odd habits you picked up yourself somewhere, for reasons
totally mysterious to you. We’re all aware that habits exist, though we often are
not as aware of our own as others are.
However, we seldom realize the enormous power of

habits. There are two kinds of habits: those that serve
you, and those that don’t. Brushing your teeth is a habit that serves you;

biting your nails is one that doesn’t. Thinking things through for yourself serves you;
blindly accepting everything you read on the Internet or hear on television doesn’t.
Looking for the best in people serves you; anticipating their worst doesn’t.
The first type of habit wields the force of the Slight Edge on your behalf and
moves you along the success curve; the second turns the Slight Edge subtly but
remorsefully against you and pulls you down the failure curve.
A habit is something you do without thinking. You come home from work, walk
into the house, pull a beer out of the fridge and flick on the TV while you’re talking
to someone on the phone, without any conscious decision that a beer is exactly what
you need right now or that there is something you urgently need to see on television.
Getting up early can become a habit. So can getting up late and staying up
late. Complaining can become a habit. Spending more than you earn can become
a habit; so can putting a piece of every paycheck into a retirement account.
Looking for the positive side of every challenge can become a habit, so can
finding the cloud in every silver lining.
The way a behavior turns into a habit is by repeating it over and over and
over again until it becomes automatic. The creation of habits is a pure Slight
Edge: simple little actions, repeated over time. The compounded effect of those
habits over time will work either for you or against you, depending on whether
they’re habits that serve you, or habits that don’t.

Your habits are what will propel you up the success curve
or down the failure curve. The individual who wants to
reach the top in business must appreciate the might of
the force of habit—and must understand that practices

Faces of the Slight Edge 133

are what create habits. He must be quick to break those
habits that can break him—and hasten to adopt those
practices that will become the habits that can help him
achieve the success he desires.
— J. Paul Getty

philosophy

your attitude
your actions
your results

creates

your

creates

It’s interesting to note where your habits really come from. They arise out
of your actions, true—but where do your actions come from? Remember this?

your
LIFE

Your habits come from your daily activities compounded over time. And
your activities are the result of the choices you make in the moment. Your choices
come from your habits of thought, which are the product of your thinking, which
comes from the view you have of the world and your place in it—your philosophy.
Which is why the key to your success, to mastering the Slight Edge through the
long-term effect of your everyday habits of thought and action, is your philosophy.
The point of this book is to give you a structure for designing your success.
Once you are aware of and understand how to use the Slight Edge to work for
you, you can go about succeeding on purpose. Your intuitive sense of the Slight
Edge becomes your automatic pilot. It guides you, keeps you on track and helps
you measure your progress. It weighs and measures your every habit, discarding
those that don’t serve you and designing new ones that do.
The key is making those right choices.
Each choice you make is like a length of steel wire. By itself, it’s not that big
a deal, but when braided together, when compounded with all the other choices
you make, these lengths of wire form a thick cable of awesome strength and power.

Nothing is stronger than habit.
—Ovid

Have you ever seen the huge steel cables that hold up suspension bridges like
the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco or the Verrazano Narrows Bridge in New
York? They’re flexible, yet they’re so thick and strong you get the sense that no
earthly force could break them. The cables made up of your right choices are just

134

The Slight Edge
like those cables. So are the ones made from your wrong ones. The cables made
from your right choices uphold and support you. Those made from wrong choices
imprison and restrain you. These cables are your habits of thought and attitude.
Want to know where the Slight Edge is taking you? Look at your predominant
habits of thought (my friend John Fogg calls them your “habitudes”) and the
kinds of choices you habitually make.
Your habits operate at the unconscious level; you are not normally aware of
them. It’s only by bringing a habit into your conscious awareness that you can
observe what it’s doing, how it empowers and serves you, or doesn’t. By developing
Slight Edge thinking (and especially by harnessing the next power we’ll talk about,
the power of reflection), you’ll shine the bright light of awareness on your habits.
Once you’re aware of a habit that doesn’t serve you, how do you change it
or get rid of it? It takes time—and it takes knowing where to focus your energy.
Trying to get rid of an unwanted habit is a bit like trying not to think about
an elephant (the more you try not to think about it, the more you think about it).
That’s because what you focus on, grows. Which is why people who put a lot of
energy into focusing on what they don’t want, by talking about it, thinking about it,
complaining about it or fretting about it, usually get precisely that unwanted thing.
It’s tough to get rid of the habit you don’t want by facing it head on. The way
to accomplish it is to replace the unwanted habit with another habit that you do
want. And creating new and better habits, ones that empower and serve you, is
something you know how to do. You do it the same way you built any habit you
have: one step at a time. Baby steps. The Slight Edge.

Harness the Power of Reflection
In my business, I often see people make the mistake of thinking they are
being productive because they are being busy. Being productive and

being busy are not necessarily the same thing. Doing
things won’t create your success; doing the right things
will. And if you’re doing the wrong things, doing more of them won’t increase

your odds of success—it will only make you fail faster!
Nobody sets out to fail. We all believe we’re headed down the right path, or
at least, a reasonably right one. People get out of bed, go to work and work hard.
They love their families. They put smiles on their faces. They do everything
they’re supposed to do and they think they’ve had a productive day, or at least set
out to have one. And all too often, what really happened is that they spent the day
treading water like a duck swimming upriver against a strong current, its little
webbed feet flailing away underneath but getting him nowhere.

Faces of the Slight Edge 135

Everybody’s busy. Everyone does the actions.
But were they the right actions? Were those actions
productive? Did you take a step forward?
These are questions that most people never take the time to think about.
Did you eat well, or did you eat badly? Who did you associate with today?
Did they empower you? How? In what way? Did you listen to good information
today, or just zone out to the music? Did you engage in positive conversation, or
did you gossip or complain? What did you read that contributed to your success
today? Did you do any of the things unsuccessful people aren’t willing to do?
Whose dream did you build today—yours or somebody else’s?
In the 12-Step System, this is called “taking a searching and fearless personal
inventory.” I honestly encourage you to get a little searching and fearless with
yourself. Keep your progress—or the lack of it—in your face!
Here’s a powerful exercise: Instead of writing down what you’re going to do
(chances are you’ve been doing that your entire life anyway, and it doesn’t make
you any better at doing them!), write down at the end of the day what you did do
that day. What actions did you take today that made you successful?
Did you read ten pages of a good book? Did you eat healthy food and get some
good exercise? Did you engage in positive associations? Did you do the things you
need to do to be successful in your business? Did you tell somebody, “I love you”?
At the end of a week, look back over your lists and take inventory. Not only
will it tell you a lot about the truth of your everyday life, chances are good that
the mere act of recording this daily reflection will have already started changing
what you do!
Here’s what this exercise did for me the first time I did it: After the first few
days, I found that by 10:00 in the morning, I was changing my normal course
for the day and engaging in more positive Slight Edge actions—because I didn’t
want to face that man in the mirror empty-handed again that night!
There are lots of different ways to practice consistent self-reflection, and
I don’t necessarily recommend one over another, simply because everyone’s
different and what works best for me may not work best for you.
Some people accomplish this by keeping a journal. If you choose this
approach, here’s the key to making it work: don’t just write down a record of what
happened today, along with your thoughts and feelings about what happened.
Ask yourself the specific Slight Edge questions. In each area of my life, what are
the critical, simple little things that are easy to do, and easy not to do? Did I do
them? Did I move forward? Did I ride on the success curve?

136

The Slight Edge
Some like keeping a journal sporadically, but find it difficult to keep up day
in and day out, and instead create a specific, written list of Slight Edge actions
that they consult and check off every day. On days they don’t make time to write
an entry in their journal, they at least go through the list and ask themselves those
questions: In each area of my life, did I do those things that are easy to do, and easy
not to do? Did I continue my momentum on the success curve?
Some would rather talk than write, and prefer to keep track of the day’s
actions out loud, in conversation. You can find a Slight Edge buddy, a friend who
also wants to harness the power of reflection, and schedule a little time together
or on the phone to debrief each other. How did the day go? In each area of my life,
did I ... ? Doing this every day is ideal, but you can still make it work very well
with a twice-a-week call, or even a once-a-week call. The key is consistency; like
the tortoise, steady wins the race.
More and more, people are choosing to achieve a higher level of productivity
through reflection by working with a coach. Only ten or fifteen years ago, most
people thought of “coaching” only in the context of athletics. Then people
realized that they had way better chances of pursuing their fitness goals if they
used a personal trainer.
Soon, high-level business executives started using individual consulting
sessions with productivity consultants to “coach” them in their high-stakes
financial and organizational game. And in the last few years, the dam burst:
people suddenly realized they could hire a coach for anything and everything, and
the field of “personal coaching” exploded as one of the hottest new occupations.
So, what does a coach do? More than anything else, a coach holds up a mirror
and shows you what you’re doing, day in and day out. A coach keeps the Slight
Edge in your face. A coach helps you harness the power of reflection.
Whatever method you choose to use, find some way to make reflection an
everyday thing, day in and day out, without fail.
When what you didn’t improve one day is clear to you and you’re aware
of it, by 10:00 the next morning you’ll be hunting for self-improvements like a
heat-seeking missile. You’ll be reading, listening, associating to and with things
and people that empower you. You won’t be able to help it! You’ll become so
motivated that nothing—nothing—will prevent you from improving.

Harness the Power of Celebration
There is another critical reason the power of reflection is so important. It’s
not just to be a nag and remind you when you’re slacking off. It’s also to point out
to you all the positive steps you’re taking.

Faces of the Slight Edge 137
Over twenty years ago, authors Ken Blanchard and Spencer Johnson wrote,
“People who feel good about themselves produce good results.” The little book
in which these words appeared, The One Minute Manager, became one of the
decade’s most influential business books. Blanchard and Johnson coined what
has become one of the most well worn phrases in business: they urged managers
and business owners not to walk around trying to catch people doing something
wrong, but to “catch them doing something right,” and then acknowledge it on
the spot. They called this a “one minute praising.”

It’s easy to forget to catch yourself doing
something right.
If you have kids, chances are that you can still remember the moment
they took their first step. Chances are good that step got noticed and
celebrated, big time. And chances are even better that within a week, they
were walking around for hours a day and nobody even gave it a second
thought—including them.
I heard a story once about a woman who had reached a point in her early
fifties where she felt she was so badly starving for affection, she didn’t know if she
could continue in her marriage. She told her husband how she felt, and said that
for years, she had been unable to tell if he still loved her or not.
Her husband was genuinely perplexed. “But I told you I love you thirty
years ago,” he exclaimed. “Why would you think anything changed?” Poor man:
it had never occurred to him that it’s not enough to say, “I love you” one time. It’s
something that needs saying every day, and not only in words, but in actions, too,
especially those little, thoughtful things that say, “I’m thinking about you and I
care about you.”
It’s the Slight Edge power of reflection and acknowledgement—celebration.
Keep your Slight Edge activities, your right choices and incremental
successes, right out in the open where you can see them and celebrate them.
Remember that all the activity ever required to apply the Slight Edge for your
success is nothing but a series of baby steps. Trust the process. Acknowledge
those steps, no matter how small or insignificant they may seem at the time.
Is it easy to do? Yes. Easy not to do? Yes. If you don’t do it, will it destroy
you? No ... but that simple error in judgment, compounded over time, will ruin
your chances for success.
Make each successful right choice a celebration. You’ll be able to feel,
literally, those balance scales shifting in your favor. Nothing breeds success like
more success.

138

The Slight Edge

Key Points of Chapter 9
There are several faces of the Slight Edge that, once you recognize it in your
life, you can harness in the pursuit of your dreams.
Momentum—Steady wins the race. Once you’re in motion, it’s easy to keep on
keeping on. Once you stop, it’s hard to change from stop to go.
Completion—Each and every incomplete thing in your life or work exerts a
draining force on you, sucking the energy of accomplishment and success out of you.
Take on those incompletions in your life just as you took on learning to walk.
Habit—Your habits are what will propel you up the success curve or down the
failure curve.
Reflection—Being productive and being busy are not necessarily the same
thing. Doing things won’t create your success; doing the right things will. Were those
actions productive? Did you take a step forward?
Celebration—Keep your Slight Edge activities, your right choices and incremental
successes, right out in the open where you can see them and celebrate them. Acknowledge
those steps, no matter how small or insignificant they may seem at the time.

were
When we were first introduced to the Slight Edge principles we
our own bills,
financially upside down. We did not have the ability to pay
Edge
let alone bless the lives of others. After understanding the Slight
We applied the
philosophy we started applying it to every area of our lives.
activities
principles to our family business. As a team we focused on daily
to
that we knew would eventually give us the momentum we needed
we
what
did
and
tasks
ted
comple
we
sure
made
We
achieve our goals.
past.
said we would do so that nothing could hold us back to the
tive as
We spent time reflecting on how our efforts could be more produc
success as
our
te
celebra
to
nity
opportu
every
for
looked
we
and
a team
The results of
well as recognize others that helped us gain those successes.
imagined.
have
could
we
than
more
been
have
es
principl
those
g
applyin
say we put
could
you
guess
I
years.
5
just
in
Our income grew 1,000 pecent
it.
worth
ly
definite
was
it
and
hours
10,000
in our
tion to help
Beyond that, we have been able to start a non-profit founda
y raising
recentl
been
has
nt
plishme
accom
st
proude
Our
the less fortunate.
also begun
over $100,000 for a girls orphanage in Guatemala. We have
orphanages.
to organize trips every 90 days for others to volunteer at the
not only
By implementing these simple principles into our lives we have
have
ntly
importa
more
but
lives,
our
of
quality
the
d
drastically improve
need.
in
those
touch
and
out
reach
to
able
been

—Mike, Steve, & Kim Melia, Wilmington, NC

CHAPTER 10

Invest in Yourself

No stream rises higher than its source. Whatever
man might build could never express or reflect more
than he was. He could record neither more nor less
than he had learned of life when the buildings were
built ... His philosophy, true or false, is there.
— Frank Lloyd Wright

The greatest gift you could ever give yourself is also the wisest business
investment you could ever make. It is also the most critical step in accomplishing
any challenging task, and is the one step without which all other success strategies,
no matter how brilliant or time-tested, are doomed to fail.
What is this mysterious gift? It is your own personal development. Investing
in your own improvement, your own personal growth and betterment, is all these
things and more.
Abraham Lincoln said, “Give me six hours to chop down a tree, and I will
spend the first four hours sharpening the axe.” In other words, he would spend
twice as much time working on himself as on the task itself.
What do most people do? They grab the axe, dull or not, and start whaling
away at the tree. And if they aren’t making a major dent in that tree pretty soon,
they quit—and probably mutter something about how it’s the tree’s fault!
How you swing the axe, how hard, in what arc and with what rhythm on
exactly what spot you hit the tree—all these are strategies that concern your
actions, and they can all be measured, weighed, and improved ... but it starts
with the axe itself. And the axe is you.

140

The Slight Edge

Results Come Last
It is easy to be seduced by the promise of results. We live in a results-oriented
world, a culture that overwhelmingly measures the success of a course of action
by its results. Talk is cheap, after all—and what is it that really matters? Results.
The bottom line. Show me. Proof of the pudding’s in the eating, right?
But there is a problem here. There’s a flaw in this thinking. In fact, the flaw in
this thinking is so profound; ninety-five percent of all people’s efforts are ending
up as failure! And what is so remarkable is that this isn’t some deep, hidden,
subtle flaw. It’s so obvious, everyone ought to see it—but it’s so deeply ingrained
in our culture, nearly everyone is hypnotized into missing it.
Here is the flaw: How can you judge the course of action

you’re taking by its results, when its results come last?

The problem with focusing on results is simply that it doesn’t work. Having
your attention on your results is like driving your car by looking in the rearview
mirror. Your results live in the past, and like all things in the past, they belong there.
What you can do with your results is learn from them. Results are valuable
feedback. Let them help motivate and guide your tomorrows. But a focus on
results only takes you out of the present moment where the action really is.
What about your actions?
Many approaches to personal and professional development I have observed
go deeper than results by focusing instead on your actions as the place to bring
about positive change. That’s a logical place to start looking, but the problem is
that your actions are not the source of your success or failure.
Again, that’s why diets don’t work; they can’t. They’re doomed to fail
because most diets dictate what your actions should be. They don’t deal with
where your actions come from.
The only reliable, consistent way to control your attitudes—that control
your actions, which control your results—is to control your thoughts. And the
source of your thoughts is your philosophy. This is why the master entrepreneur
W. Clement Stone uttered these often-quoted words: “What the mind of man
can conceive and believe, the mind of man can achieve.”
Your philosophy is your paradigm, your view of the way life is. It is how
you say life works or doesn’t work, and determines everything about the course
of actions you’ll choose and keep choosing over time. Your philosophy

is the foundation upon which you build your life.
There is nothing more fundamental or essential.

Your philosophy is the source of your failure or success. It is the garden
in which your beliefs grow—and your beliefs lay the fertile groundwork for

Invest in Yourself
everything else. The Slight Edge will either promote you or expose you for who
and what you really are—and who and what you are comes from your philosophy.
In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus spoke of two types of foundation. He
spoke about the “wise man” who built his house upon the rock: “And the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and burst against that
house; and yet it did not fall, for it had been founded upon the rock.”
And then he told of a second character—a “foolish man” who built his house
on sand: “And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
burst against that house; and it fell and great was its fall.”
The foundation upon which you are building the house of your life is what will
determine the nature of the house itself. Will the house stand? Will it fall apart?
Will it leak, or will it withstand whatever weather nature throws at it? What results
will your life produce? It’s a critically important question—because by the time
the results are in, the outcome will already be pretty well determined. You can’t
wait for your results to judge your actions. You can’t wait to see what kind of house
you’ve got before you judge whether or not it had a sturdy foundation!
Your success will always be the progressive realization of a worthy ideal.
Your philosophy comes first; your results come last. And this brings us to the
most important Slight Edge strategy of all.

Continuous Learning

The trouble with the world is not that people know too
little, but that they know so many things that ain’t so.
— Mark Twain

We’ve talked about all sorts of forces you can harness to help power your path
through life. The most important force of all, the force that drives the whole process
of living with the Slight Edge, is the power of continuous learning.
When I say “learning,” I don’t mean simply learning from school, although
schooling certainly has its place. And I don’t just mean learning from books or
from a teacher—though you already know that I revere the knowledge to be gained
from good books, and I feel the same way about great teachers, too. I’m also not
just talking here about learning from the example of others, from advice from your
friends, from the “school of hard knocks,” or learning from your mistakes ...
I don’t mean any one of those ... I mean all of them! Once you’ve set foot
on the path of mastery and grasped the philosophy of the Slight Edge, educating
yourself through any and all means available is the critical process that will keep
you on that path and make the Slight Edge work for you.

141

142

The Slight Edge
I also don’t mean “education” in the more narrowly defined sense of learning
specific skills or subjects. Naturally, you need to pursue continuous learning in order
to acquire the knowledge and skills involved in mastering any subject or pursuit that
will contribute to your personal and professional growth and development. But it’s
more than simply a matter of acquiring specific knowledge. Continuous, lifelong
learning is the material from which you continually build your philosophy—and by
now, you and I both know how important that is! Learning is also the material from
which you build your awareness, and that is also critical in mastering the Slight Edge.
After getting out of high school, fifty-eight percent of all high school
graduates who don’t go on to college never read a book again! When I first read
that figure, I was shocked ... but not surprised. That’s one reason the ninety-five
percent give up and slide down the failure curve. They spend their lives building
someone else’s dream, not because they aren’t capable of building their own, but
because they never gained the knowledge they needed.
Illiteracy is a much greater problem today than many people realize. Of
the slightly more than six billion people on earth, according to the Wycliffe
organization, one billion cannot read! Can you imagine that?! One person out of
every six—one billion people—cannot read, and that rate is on the rise.
But consider this: If you are one of that fifty-eight percent who never reads
after high school, what’s the difference between you and the billion people around
the world who couldn’t read if they wanted to? No difference at all.
Of course, simply reading won’t necessarily put you on the success curve.
Remember my shoeshine woman and her little pile of novels? No question about
her literacy—the woman loved to read. But where would she have been if that
pile had included Norman Vincent Peale, Dale Carnegie, Zig Ziglar, Jim Rohn,
The Millionaire Next Door, Smart Women Finish Rich, and any of the hundreds
and thousands of other inspirational, educational, empowering books out there?
Where would she have been if for the previous year or two, she’d read just ten
pages, one chapter, of those books in between customers?
You know where she’d be.
When was the last time you attended a seminar or took an adult-education
class, not because you were required to, but simply to improve yourself? When
was the last time you went bowling? If your bowling average is over 200,
congratulations! You’re a heck of a bowler—and you may want to rethink your
priorities. If you lined up the one hundred most successful men and women in
America and calculated their bowling averages, I bet they wouldn’t break 70. The
average American will go bowling 233 times in his or her life—and they all have
something better to do. I know bowling is one of the most popular pastimes in the
United States, but wouldn’t you rather have success be your most popular pastime?

Invest in Yourself
I’m not picking on bowling, or any other form of recreation. We need
balance in our lives, and taking time at the bowling alley can also serve you in all
sorts of ways—your fitness, your relationships with your friends, your ability to
let work go, to relax and have fun. All good things ... but the question is, are you
developing yourself? Are you building your dream or only your boss’s?
Read just one chapter of an information-rich, inspiring book every day.
Listen to fifteen minutes of a life-transforming CD or audio download. Take a
course or seminar every few weeks or months.
Are these things easy to do? Sure. And those simple disciplines compounded
over time, like a penny doubled every day for a month, will send you up to
the top. Are they easy not to do? No question. And if you don’t do them, will
you destroy your life today? Of course not. But that simple error in judgment,
compounded over time, will pull you down the curve of failure and take away
everything you’ve hoped for and dreamed about ... forever!

“Book Smarts” vs. “Street Smarts”
Q: Five frogs sat on a lily pad. One decided to jump off. How many were left?
A: Five ... all of them are still sitting there. The one frog only decided to jump.
The famous Chinese proverb says, “The journey of a thousand miles starts with
a single step”—another wonderful example of traditional Slight Edge wisdom. But
note: The journey starts with a single step—not with thinking about taking a step!
Plenty of people accumulate knowledge but still dwell on the failure curve. It’s
not only the quantity of knowledge that sets and keeps your course, but also the
quality of knowledge. There are different types of knowledge and different avenues
of learning; if you want to stay grounded and move ahead at the same time, you
need a balance.
There are three principle kinds of learning. The first is learning by study,
which includes reading, listening to CDs and audio downloads, and attending
classes and seminars. The second type is learning by doing.
As passionate as I am about improving yourself by studying with great
teachers, through great books, CDs and other media, I also know that all the study
in the world won’t build your business, establish your health, or create a happy,
fulfilling family life. That takes your getting up and doing it. Book smarts is not
enough: all true success is built from a foundation of study plus street smarts.
Life is not a spectator sport—it is a contact sport; there is no practice session.
You’ve been immersed in it from day one; life lives in the right-here, rightnow. That’s why Emerson, who was an exceptionally well-educated man in the
traditional book-smarts sense, advised, Do the thing, and you shall have the power.

143

144

The Slight Edge
Note that this is not a reversible philosophy. You can’t just go get the power
and then do the thing—though people do try to do it that way, and they spend their
entire lives gathering the power ... and doing nothing.
Do the thing, and you shall have the power. The only way to have the power is
to do the thing. Just do it. That’s learning by doing.
In my marketing business, I’m often asked for the key to success. “What’s the
one thing I can do to guarantee my success?” My answer is always the same: “Be here,
actively immersed in the process, one year from now.” That’s really the only right
answer. It’s the Slight Edge answer. You can’t build your dream by what you’re going
to do or planning to do or intend to do. You only build your dream by building it.
If you aren’t doing, you’re dying. Life is doing.

The Rhythm of Learning

Knowledge without practice is useless. Practice
without knowledge is dangerous.
— Confucius

I can read a book like As a Man Thinketh, return it to my bookshelf, then
come back a year later to read it again—and it feels like somebody sneaked into
my room while I was sleeping and completely rewrote the book! Why? Because
of the learning by doing I’ve gone through in the interim. My experiences have
changed my perspective. Now, when I read a particular passage or point the
author makes, I understand it in a way I could not have possibly seen a year ago.
And that in turn informs my behavior: now, when I go to engage in my activity
of the next day, I can apply what I’ve learned from James Allen in a way that I
would not have thought of even twenty-four hours ago.
Book smarts, street smarts. Learning by study, learning by doing. Read
about it, apply it, see it in action, take that practical experience back to my
reading, deepen my understanding, take that deeper understanding back to my
activity ... it’s a never-ending cycle, each aspect of learning feeding the other.
Like climbing a ladder: right foot, left foot, right foot, left foot.
Can you imagine trying to climb a ladder with only your right foot?
The two work together. What’s more, they not only work better together,
each amplifying the other, but the truth is, they really cannot work separately.
At least not for long.
You can’t excel based purely on knowledge learned in study; you can’t
excel purely through knowledge gleaned through action. The two have to work
together. You study, and then you do activity. The activity changes your frame of

Invest in Yourself
reference, and now you are in a place where you can learn more. Then you learn
more, and it gives you more insight into what you experienced in your activity,
so now you re-approach activity with more insight. And back and forth, it goes.
This back-and-forth rhythm is worth noting. It is the rhythm of success.
Remember when we talked about “baby steps”? This learning-and-doing
sense of rhythm is something you learned even before you learned to walk,
and it’s even more basic. Psychologists have found crawling is one of the most
important activities we ever accomplish, because it profoundly affects the brain
and its capacity to learn. The right-hand-left-leg, left-hand-right-leg rhythm
of alternation acts upon our nervous systems like the surf upon the coastline,
developing it, shaping it, and preparing it for all sorts of more sophisticated levels
of learning and awareness later in life.
You’ve heard the expression, “Before you can walk, you have to crawl.” There
is more profound truth to this than most of us ever realized. That alternating
rhythm, and your capacity to coordinate the behavior of opposites, is a critical
Slight Edge skill. Balancing book smarts and street smarts is one aspect of that,
and so is the daily success strategy that we’ll look at next: course correction.

Course Correction

You return again and again take the proper course—
guided by what? By the picture in mind of the place
you are headed for ...
— John McDonald

What’s the shortest path between two points? A straight line, right? Wrong.
While that might be true in theory, it’s never true in reality. And reality is where
you and I live—and where we succeed or fail.
Have you driven on any roads lately that are perfectly straight? Even when
you’re on one of those interstates that seems like a long straight line to forever,
do you hold the steering wheel perfectly still? Or do you move it back and forth,
constantly correcting the direction the car is headed? That constant moving of
the steering wheel is so familiar, it’s second nature, and you probably never think
about it. But if you decided to hold the wheel rigidly in place, you’d be off the
road, probably in less than a minute.
And in case you think that’s just a matter of engineering, or of imperfections
in the road’s surface, this next example may come as a bit of a shock:
On its way to the moon, the miracle of modern engineering that is an Apollo
rocket is actually on course only two or three percent of the time; for at least

145

146

The Slight Edge
ninety-seven percent of the time it takes to get from the Earth to the moon, it’s off
course. In a journey of nearly a quarter of a million miles, the vehicle is on track
for only 7,500 miles ... or to put it another way, for every half-hour the ship is in
flight, it is on course for less than sixty seconds!
And it gets to the moon?! How is that possible?
Because modern space travel is a masterful example of the Slight Edge course
correction in action.
If this machine, one of the most sophisticated, expensive and finely calibrated
pieces of technology ever devised, was correcting its own off-course errors twentynine minutes out of every thirty, is it reasonable to expect that you could do better
than that? And even if you were able to match the rocket’s degree of accuracy, you’d
still be perfectly on target, on track and on course no more than ten days per year!
For anyone who lacks a grasp of the Slight Edge, being off course is something
to be avoided at all costs. After all, if you’re off course, you’re failing, right? But
those who understand the Slight Edge embrace Thomas Watson’s philosophy
about failure. Here is a more extended version of what he said:

Would you like me to give you the formula for success?
It’s quite simple, really. Double your rate of failure ...
You’re thinking of failure as the enemy of success. But
it isn’t at all ... You can be discouraged by failure—or
you can learn from it. So go ahead and make mistakes.
Make all you can. Because, remember, that’s where
you’ll find success. On the other side of failure.
— Thomas J. Watson, Sr.

Remember, the rocket got there. And so can you. Why? Because of
continuous course correction.
What enabled the rocket to continue to make those adjustments that
brought it back on track to reach its destination? The adjustments were all done
by a computerized guidance system, the heart of which was a gyroscope.
A gyroscope is a spinning mass mounted in a base that retains the same
orientation no matter in what direction the base itself is going. You may have played
with a toy gyroscope as a child—the kind you wind up with a string like a top, make
it spin, and no matter how you hold it or what you do to it, it remains upright as
long as it’s spinning around. The force created by that toy gyroscope is so powerful
it can balance on the tip of your finger or dance upright along a string.
The rocket starts from point A (its current position) and heads for point B
(the moon). As it travels its first few miles, it gets slightly off course. Now the

Invest in Yourself
rocket’s gyroscope shows one reading, while the rocket’s instruments show that
it’s actually headed in a slightly different direction. The gyroscope, remember, is
always pointed in the right direction, the direction the ship actually wants to go.
The computer processor detects that the rocket’s off course and tells it to
make an adjustment. If the processor and the rocket were speaking English, the
conversation might sound something like this:
Processor: “Rocket, you’re 1.27 degrees north—bring it back to 1.29.”
Rocket: “Okay ... done.”
Processor: “Good ... Whoa, that’s too much, now you’re 1.30—
move it 0.01 degrees south.”
Rocket: “No problem, I’ll do that, too.”
Processor: “Great—no, wait, too far west. Adjust course 0.067 degrees.”
Rocket: “Got it, consider it done.”
Processor: “Whoops, too much, come back 0.012.”
Rocket: “Right, 0.012 ... how’s that?”
Processor: “Little too far north again, ease back to 1.27 ... ”
And so it goes, from here to the moon, a constantly occurring series of
adjustments turning what is predominantly a string of failures into ultimate success.
You have a gyroscope, too, and it works in much the same way, if you allow it to.
Your gyroscope is your vision of where you’re going—in other words, your dream.
Your processor is the Slight Edge: a consistent series of tiny, seemingly insignificant
actions, easy to do and easy not to do, and in this case, doing them leads you directly
to the moon instead of shooting off into the vacuum of outer space.
You’re hungry. There’s a bunch of greasy junk food in a vending machine
beckoning you. Your gyroscope is spinning—it’s focused on your health. Your
processor goes, click ... click ... whirr ... and you choose a salad or a piece of
fruit instead.
There’s a display rack of books and magazines. You reach toward the copy
of People because it has a juicy piece of gossip you’d just love to read—about a
movie star you can’t stand but it looks really intriguing anyway—and it’s only
a few bucks and you’ve got some time over lunch, and—Click ... whirrr ... click
... and instead you decide to go back to your car for your copy of Smart Women
Finish Rich. Or to take a twenty-minute walk in the park.
You’re having coffee with friends and they start complaining about their
work, their bosses, their jobs ... Click ... click ... whirrr ... and you find a way to
change the subject because you know that if the talk doesn’t get onto a positive
track within another sixty seconds, you’ll find a reason to excuse yourself.
Click ... click ... whirrr ...

147

148

The Slight Edge
Knowing the Slight Edge, you make the adjustment automatically. You
make those right choices, the ones that serve you. You do those simple, seemingly
insignificant things that forward your progress up the success curve. You read
good books. You listen to motivating tapes. You hang around successful people
who empower you. You’re a five percenter, a winner, a success.
Once you know the Slight Edge, you know that in getting from point
A to point B you’ll be off track most of the time. And you know that it’s the
adjustments—those little, seemingly insignificant corrections in direction—that
have the most power in your life.

Kaizen: Plan, Do, Review
You know this saying: “Ready ... aim ... ” and what comes next? “Fire!”
right? That’s the way it’s usually put—but there’s a better way.
Ready, fire, aim!
The problem with “Ready, aim, fire” is that in the real world, where
everything is in motion and things are constantly changing, by the time you’ve
finished all that readying and aiming, the target is long gone!
Here’s another way of saying ready, fire, aim: plan, do, review.
“Plan, do, review” is an approach to learning that began gaining credibility
in educational institutions toward the end of the twentieth century, and it’s used
in some of the better schools today. It’s a Slight Edge strategy.
Students plan what they’re going to learn and create their own activities and
experiments for study. Then, they do what they planned. And then they review
their planning and doing to see if anything was missing to help them learn what
could be done to improve the process and the results they’ve accomplished. Then
they plug those new insights into their next plan, and they’re off and running up
the Slight Edge curve to success.
The operative Slight Edge strategy at work here is the constant and
consistent back-and-forth of doing actions and correcting those actions—course
correction, just like the moon rocket. What this strategy produces is what
business management philosophy has come to call “continuous improvement,”
a concept that the Japanese call kaizen.
This idea was introduced to Japan after World War II by an American, W.
Edwards Deming. A remarkable statistician, Dr. Deming consulted and lectured
Japanese industrial leaders about “total quality.” He taught that “the system is
the solution”—and showed how it’s always the source of the problem as well.
Remember what happened to the Japanese and American auto industries in
the ’70s and ’80s? The Japanese ate America’s lunch in the marketplace. Know
why? Slight Edge strategy. They had it; we didn’t.

Invest in Yourself
The Japanese took Deming’s Slight Edge teachings about simple little
disciplines in improving quality, compounded them over time, and in less than a
decade they blew the much larger, richer and more powerful industry leader (the
United States) out of the water. So far out of the water, in fact, that the top-selling
car in America for years was the Honda.
It wasn’t that the Americans didn’t improve. The 1983 Chevy was clearly
superior to the 1973 Chevy. But General Motors kept looking for those big
breakthroughs, while the Japanese kept making little, seemingly insignificant
improvements which, compounded over time, enabled them to steal the spotlight
in what was once almost exclusively an American car show. The Japanese had major
automotive breakthroughs, too, but they were the result of their Slight Edge strategy.
In the 1990s, the American auto industry made quite a comeback: great cars,
record sales and profits. It was a stunning turnaround, and what turned it around
were our automakers finally embracing the teachings of W. Edwards Deming: that
a commitment to developing and sticking to a Slight Edge strategy will absolutely,
positively send you to the top.
Plan, do, review (and ready, fire, aim!) creates a structure and support system
for continuously improving. It’s the strategy of constant course correction. You
may have heard the expression, “It’s not how you plan your work, it’s how you
work your plan.” Not quite. A Slight Edge strategy means doing both at once—
one tiny, course-correcting step at a time.
The Slight Edge is the process. You choose which way it goes: up with the
five percent, or down with the other ninety-five percent. You don’t just make that
choice once and then say, “Ahh, I’m finished, now I’m all set.” You make that
choice moment to moment to moment—and keep making it, every month and
every day, for the rest of your life.
Each new moment will present you with a new Slight Edge choice to be made.
Before long it will become natural and automatic, but when you first begin, it will
require your constant awareness.
You have to choose to make the Slight Edge work for you—moment by
moment, one step at a time. Remember the rocket to the moon.
Is it easy to do? Yes. Is it easy not to do? Of course. If you don’t do it, will your
life collapse? No—not today. But that simple error in judgment, compounded
over time, will pull you down the failure curve, absolutely and irrevocably, no
questions asked. Unless you accept the wealthy man’s third gift—the choice—
and keep on accepting it, day by day and moment by moment.

Learning Through Modeling
Earlier I mentioned that there are three principal types of learning. We’ve
examined the first two (learning through study and learning through doing) and

149

150

The Slight Edge
you’re probably wondering if we we’re ever going to get around to the third! In a
way, I’ve saved the best for last, because utilizing this third type of learning will
tremendously accelerate the first two.
It is knowledge through modeling.
Throughout human history (and long before there were such things as
books, universities or continuing education programs) there has been one triedand-true path for learning a skill, craft, art, trade or profession: go study with a
master. All the great learning traditions say the same thing: if you want to learn
how to do something well, go find a master of that skill and apprentice yourself.
Like the “coaching” model, the “mentor/apprentice” model is experiencing
a tremendous surge in popularity right now. Mentoring networks, agencies and
organizations are springing up in all sorts of professions—and this doesn’t surprise
me in the least.
With the advent of the Internet culture, there’s been an explosion in
information over the past decade. Now we’re starting to realize that information
alone is not enough—and information plus personal experience (the “school of
hard knocks”) is not enough. We need some way to process all that information
and experience and integrate it. And there is only one reliable, solid way to do
that: find someone else or a community of people who have already mastered an
area, and model yourself based on their experience.
A lack of community is the largest criticism of “personal development,” as
listed in Wikipedia’s definition. Your personal development has to be a contact
sport where you are in contact with others that can help you on your journey.
It has already been proven that information and technology alone are not
going to create real change. Today, we see information on health soaring and yet
we have seen an increase in obesity, adult onset diabetes, and other preventable
diseases. We see information on finances everywhere, yet a rise in debt and
mismanaged money. Information needs to be coupled with a community to have
any real life-changing effects.
Let’s look at an example where information and community are coupled
together to create real change in people’s lives.
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is a successful rehabilitation program because
it provides all the information needed on the condition and marries that with
a community of people to support the member. If it only handed out DVDs
and brochures and put up a website about the disease, and left it at that, how
many people do you think would actually recover? Not many. Of course, a
member needs the information, but what makes the program truly work is the
environment and associations that are created around that person. The same is

Invest in Yourself
true for personal development and any change we want to see in our life. It has to
consist of information and a supportive environment.
Whatever goals you aspire to, just seek out people who have achieved the
same or very similar goals, or who are well along that path, and go camp on their
doorsteps or do whatever you can to associate with them, emulate them, and let
their grasp, understanding and mastery of the subject rub off on you.

Spend Time with the Masters
If you want to raise the quality of your life, hang out with people who have
been there and done that. If you want to be a great public speaker, spend time
with great speakers. If you want to be a success in business, then find a way to
spend time in the company of successful businesspeople. If it’s important to you
to be a terrific parent, the best thing you can do to further that aim is to spend lots
of time with men and women who have mastered parenting.
You can define a society by the heroes it keeps. You can also define a person
by the heroes he or she keeps. Who are your heroes? Who are you modeling
yourself after?
The ninety-five percent on the failure curve tend to accept the heroes society
plants in front of them: film stars (America’s version of royalty), rock stars,
sports stars. I can certainly admire these folks, but I always ask myself, Can I
emulate them? Practically speaking, can I convert my admiration into constructive
modeling that increases my learning and moves my own life forward?
Too often, we make heroes out of people who can’t help us, whose lives are
fantasies, not genuine role models. Take a look at who your heroes are—write
down a list and examine it. Ask yourself, “Can I become like them? Are these
people doing the kinds of things that I aspire to do and living the kinds of lives
that I aspire to live? Can they really help me become who I want to become?”
Find people who’ve done what you want to do and surround yourself with
them. That’s learning through modeling, and it’s a powerful part of learning
how to understand and use the Slight Edge. Once you become worthy of being
modeled, you in essence become the teacher. And if you teach long enough,
people begin to look at you as a master.
The problem is that most people want to go from learning to becoming the
teacher. They don’t want to bother with having to learn the activities well enough
to be modeled.
The quarterback position in football is a great example. First he has to learn
the playbook. Secondly, he takes those plays from the chalkboard to the practice
field. And if he is good enough at implementing his learned knowledge, the team

151

152

The Slight Edge
eventually looks to him as a leader. If he is a worthy leader long enough, soon
other team members are modeling him. When you watch great quarterbacks play
like Joe Montana or Peyton Manning, it is very clear that they have been leaders
of their team long enough that they have earned the right to be modeled after and
are seen as the coaches on the field.

The Law of Associations
Do you remember a comment I made about income, way back in the very
beginning of this book? While I was sitting in the Phoenix airport thinking about
my new friend, the shoeshine woman, I mused over this thought:
Your income tends to equal the average of the incomes of your five best friends.
This principle does not apply solely to your finances: it operates in every
aspect of your life.
Your level of health will tend to be about the average level of health of your
five best friends. Your personal development will be at about the average level
of personal development of your five best friends. Your relationships, financial
health, attitudes, level of success in your career, and everything else about your
life will tend to be very close to the average level of each of these conditions in
your five closest friends and associates.
We all understand this principle instinctively; our language is shot through
with idioms that reflect it:
You’re known by the company you keep.
Show me where you fish and I’ll show you what you catch.
Birds of a feather flock together.

You are the combined average of the five people you
associate with most—including the way you walk, talk,
act, think and dress. Your income, your accomplishments,
even your values and philosophy will reflect them.
If the five people around you have negative philosophies, it’s virtually
impossible for you to have a positive philosophy. If the five people around you are
consistently complaining, living in the past, blaming others for their difficulties,
and thinking and acting in a generally negative way, then what are the odds of
you finding your way onto the success curve? Slim to none.
If you consistently associate with negative people, it’s highly unlikely you
will succeed at having and maintaining a positive approach to your life.
Become acutely aware of who you are modeling. This has everything to do
with your philosophy and your attitudes, which has more to do with your actions
and with what you’re actually doing and creating in your everyday life than any
other factor.

Invest in Yourself
The reason “birds of a feather flock together” is simply that they’re all going
in the same direction, headed for the same destination. Look at the people with
whom you flock, the company you keep: what destination are they headed for?
And is that where you want to be headed?
Look at the people around you. Are they more successful than you are? Are they
people who live the kinds of lives you aspire to live, or the kinds of lives you hope to
leave behind? On what side of the Slight Edge are they living—on the success curve
or the failure curve? Is the Slight Edge working for them or against them? Where will
they be in twenty years? And are they pulling you up or dragging you down?
This is a pass or fail test: there is no “maybe” about it. Remember, there is
no standing still: we’re all going in one of two directions, either up or down. Your
association with each person you know is either empowering you, or it’s not—
taking you up the success curve or down the failure curve.
How can you tell? One way is to go back to the business of future and past,
responsibility and blame. When you and this particular friend get together, are
your conversations about responsibility, aspirations and taking initiative? Or do
they often seem to work their way around to blame or its cousins—envy, jealousy,
resentment and irritation?
Do your conversations focus more on the future or on the past? It’s only
natural, when you share a common history and set of experiences, to enjoy
reminiscing over fond memories; that’s not what I mean. What I mean is, does
your relationship have a forward-looking, positive feeling to it, or do the two of
you get together and always seem to end up circling events of the past, like a cat
endlessly turning round and round before it can settle down to sleep?
If your relationship with someone has a theme of blame and feeds on the
past, it’s disempowering. If it has a theme of responsibility, self-reflection and
change and feels like something moving into the future, it’s empowering.
We are all either building our own dreams or building somebody else’s. To put
a finer point on it, we’re either building our dreams—or building our nightmares.
There may be some people with whom you’re now spending two days a
week, where you might decide you need to take that down to two hours. There
may also be people with whom you’re spending only two minutes, where you’ll
realize you need to spend far more time with them—two hours or two days.
And you will find times when what you really need to do is simply disassociate
yourself from someone; that’s a part of the Law of Association, too.
For many people, I think this can be a tough aspect of the Slight Edge to
understand and accept. Most everything else about the Slight Edge, as you
already know, is easy to do—but disassociating yourself from people who do not
empower you can be a sad and difficult thing to do. Especially if you love them.
Especially if they are old friends or dear family.

153

154

The Slight Edge
So take heart: by “disassociating,” I don’t necessarily mean cutting them out
of your life completely. But casual relationships deserve casual time—not quality
time. There are people with whom you can spend two minutes, but not two
hours. There are people with whom you can spend two hours, but not two days.
This part of Slight Edge thinking requires a compassionate awareness.
Having compassion and having direction are not mutually exclusive: they just
take careful thought and discernment. You’re not judging those people; you’re
simply asking yourself to be honest about whether or not those relationships are
empowering you and helping to support your purpose and realize your dreams.

Leadership
I’m often asked, “How do I become a leader?” In our push-button, instanteverything world, like I said before, people often seem to want to take an express
route from the first stages of learning straight to leadership. But of course, it
doesn’t work that way.
How does it work? Leadership is not something you

“do”; it is something that grows organically out of
the natural rhythm of learning.

When you start at the beginning of anything, you’re at the highest level of
anxiety. As you learn—through study and doing, information and experience,
book smarts and street smarts—you gradually lower your level of anxiety by
raising your level of mastery.
As you continue climbing that ladder of knowledge (remember, right foot–
left foot, right foot–left foot, study–action, study–action) you keep your eyes
on worthy mentors, always using learning through modeling as your learning
gyroscope to keep you on track.
Using those three dimensions of learning—study, do, model—with Slight
Edge persistence, in time your level of mastery rises to the point where you
turn around and realize others are modeling you! You have become worthy of
emulating. The cream has become butter; the hyacinth of knowledge has covered
the pond of your effort. You have grown into leadership.
How do you become a leader? Through honestly pursuing the path of selfmastery and continuous learning.

Your Mastermind
Of all the books I have ever encountered in my pursuit of excellence as well
as all the how-to’s of success, Napoleon Hill’s masterpiece Think and Grow Rich,

Invest in Yourself
which I have mentioned several times already, is the one of the most influential.
When you ask successful people what factors most contributed to their success,
this is the book they will most commonly cite.
During the twenty years it took Napoleon Hill to write Think and Grow Rich,
he interviewed more than five hundred of the richest and most successful men
and women in the world, and then painstakingly analyzed what he’d learned and
spelled it out in the form of thirteen “success secrets.” Many of those secrets have
been woven throughout the Slight Edge principles, including having faith and a
burning desire. We also already mentioned the “Mastermind” groups in Chapter
6 in order to inoculate yourself from the negativity (aka cuckoos). Here are a few
more reasons Hill decided it was so important to create a “Mastermind” group.
“No two minds ever come together without thereby creating a third,
invisible, intangible force, which may be likened to a third mind,” wrote Hill.
A group of like-minded, achievement-oriented individuals, he explained, could
come together to create an association far greater than the sum of its parts, thus
dramatically leveraging each other’s success.
As two examples from startlingly different sides of the spectrum of human
endeavor, he cites Henry Ford and Mahatma Gandhi as masters of the Mastermind
principle, which he defines as: “The coordination of knowledge and effort of two or
more people, who work toward a definite purpose, in the spirit of harmony.”
Applying Hill’s principle is simple: surround yourself with people of like
mind and different talents and temperaments with the purpose of serving the goals
of every member of the group. Associate with these people on a regular basis.
Remember that you’re always dealing with gravity: one against nineteen,
all the time. The ninety-five percent will always tend to be cynical, skeptical and
negative; even when motivated by the best of intentions, they will attack you and
bring you down.
Apply the Law of Association. Create your own Mastermind, a group of
those who have chosen to live among the five percent, and let them support you,
let them be the lift beneath the wings of your dreams.

Key Points of Chapter 10

The greatest gift you could ever give yourself is also the wisest business
investment you could ever make. What is this mysterious gift? It is your own
personal development. Invest in your own improvement, your own personal growth
and betterment.

155

156

The Slight Edge

Investing in Personal Growth
l
The Slight Edge has been especially helpful in the area of persona
that it was a
development. I have always been around people who felt
day to
waste of time to sit and read books. Now, I take the time every
books. The
read at least 10 pages, and in the past year I have read 15
wealth of knowledge and ideas I have gained is priceless.

—Jane Lehman, Lexington, MI
I have always believed that having a great philosophy is the
foundation
for success. Although I was never an avid reader of books, primaril
y due to
not realizing the proper skills of time management, it did not enter
my mind
to just read 10 pages per day. I’m now reading five books and
feel like I’m
moving in a direction that I never dreamed possible.

—Peter Klochko, Northville, MI
journey and you
We have always believed personal development is an inner
nt principles
importa
most
the
of
one
is
that
and
ht,
overnig
there
get
will not
of “How do
t
concep
al
practic
the
Jeff teaches in The Slight Edge. I learned
Jeff Olson
what
is
That
course.
of
time,
a
at
bite
One
nt?”
elepha
you eat an
changes
one
No
Edge.
Slight
The
taught me through his philosophy as I read
book
good
a
in
l
materia
full
the
absorb
to
going
not
are
you
overnight, and
concept of
overnight. By reading 10 pages of a good book everyday our
rced, our
patience was re-enforced, our concept of self worth was re-enfo
g these principles,
concept of commitment was re-enforced, by simply applyin
we are better people.

—Ron Forrester & Leslie Hocker, Houston, TX

I was introduced to the Slight Edge philosophy when I was 19.
Before that time I
never really saw myself doing much with my life. I couldn’t hold
conversations with
strangers and I truly wasn’t interested in people. I wouldn’t say
I was a troublemaker,
but I was willing to settle for mediocre. I was an average student
in high school
and dropped out of college my first year. After reading the book,
I wanted more.
I started diving into other great books, reading 10 pages a day
and I just started
transforming. I wanted to be successful. I wanted to talk to other
people about
success. At every job I held, I shot straight up to management,
ahead of people
who had worked at the establishment for years. Even more importa
ntly, successful
people began being attracted to my attitude and my energy.
I’ll never forget the day at the gym when a highly successful real
estate developer
approached me. He said he had a great location for a new busines
s. He said if I
was interested he would finance the entire project in the beginni
ng and help me
get the new company running until I could repay him through
the cash flow of the
business. The opportunity literally fell in my lap and I jumped on
it. To this day the
business is up and running successfully. We have conquered our
first year of business
and in a couple of years I will begin the expansion of my compa
ny. I’m 22 years old
and if it wasn’t for the Slight Edge principles, and investing in myself
by reading 10
pages of a good book every day- I wouldn’t be the man I am
today.

—James Fortner, New Haven, MO

CHAPTER 11

Turning Your Dreams into Reality

Whatever you can do, or dream you can, begin it.
Boldness has genius, power and magic in it.
— Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust

There are entire books written about how to set, pursue and achieve your
goals, and some of them are actually pretty good. You may or may not need an
entire book; that’s up to you. I like to keep things as simple as possible, because
simple is usually far more effective—and most importantly, simple is what works
best with the Slight Edge. Remember “easy to do,” and you won’t stray far from
having your hands on the Slight Edge.
While everyone has a somewhat different approach to goal setting, there
are four simple and fundamental steps you need to take for your dreams to turn
into reality. Everyone who has ever created success, whether consciously or not,
whether using this specific language or not, has gone through these four steps.
They are the four universal truths of reaching for a big dream.
For a goal to come true:
You must write it down, make it specific and give it a deadline.
You must have a plan to start with.
You must understand and pay the price.
You must look at it every day;

158

The Slight Edge

Step One: Write It Down
The most critical skill of achieving success in any area whatsoever, from
sports to high finance, radiant health to fulfilling relationships, is the skill of
envisioning. Envisioning something simply means having the ability to create
a vivid picture of something that hasn’t factually happened yet, and make that
picture so vivid that it feels real.
Envisioning doesn’t happen simply by creating a picture in your mind.
If your dreams and aspirations are happening in your mind only, that’s not
envisioning, that’s wishful thinking. It’s like saying, “I’ll give it a try”—which as
Yoda pointed out, really doesn’t cut it. (“Do or do not—there is no try.”)
Envisioning means quite literally making something up out of thin air—and
making it real. By definition, you can’t do that within the confines of your skull.
It needs to become physical; it needs to involve your senses. In other words, you
need to write it down. Making pictures of it, which people sometimes call a “dream
board,” is even better. Speaking it out loud is the most powerful of all. But at the
very least, write it down. The moment you do, it has started to become real.
What do you dream about? Pick a dream you have, any dream: your dream
house, your dream car, dream vacation, dream job, dream marriage, dream
career. Pick a dream that you’d really love to have come true. Write it on the first
line below. Then pick another, and another, until you have five dreams.
If you’re hesitating, know this: these dreams may be as huge or as small as
you like; neither is “better” or more or less worthy to make real.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Good. Now, let’s have you add two descriptors that will make your dream
more concrete: what and when.
First, go back to each dream and add whatever wording you need to make
each dream absolutely specific. For example, if you had a dream to “be financially
free,” what does that mean, specifically? How much money do you need in the
bank or investments, or coming in as annual income, to achieve what you call
“financial freedom”? If there are any other conditions that need to be met (such
as “being completely debt-free”), add those in, too.

Turning Your Dreams into Reality
What if one of your dreams is “radiant health.” How would you make that
specific? One way would be to describe exactly how you feel, what kinds of
activities you engage in and what they feel like. Imagine reading your dream to
someone you care about, and that person saying, “I’m not sure I quite grasp what
you mean. Can you tell me exactly what you’re shooting for?”

Now, the second descriptor: when? It’s often been said, “Goals are
dreams with deadlines.” Let’s reshape your dreams into goals by giving
them deadlines. Go back through each dream and answer the question, “By when?”
You’ve probably heard of the Pareto Principle, known more popularly as “the
80/20 rule,” which says that, for instance, twenty percent of the people in a sales
force produce eighty percent of the results. (Vilfredo Pareto, an Italian economist
who promulgated his theories around the turn of the twentieth century, actually
arrived at his formula, which is a bit more complex than a simple 80/20 rule, to
describe the tendency of wealth, innovation and initiative to concentrate in a selfselected elite, no matter what the external social or economic system. In other
words, Pareto was really describing the success curve and failure curve—the two
sides of the Slight Edge!)
Here is another application of Pareto’s Law: eighty percent of everything
you do tends to get done in the last twenty percent of the time available! If you
don’t create a concrete deadline, that last twenty percent never seems to arrive
... and you’re always living in the eighty-percent time that says, “some day ... ”
Write your dreams down; make them vivid and specific; give them a concrete
timeline for realization; and you’ve taken a giant step toward making them real!

Step Two: Start with a Plan
This is the point where people are often thrown off track. It’s easy to assume
that you need to put together the plan that will get you there—in other words,
the right plan. The plan that will work. No. The point is not to come up with the
brilliant blueprint that will take you all the way to the finish line. The point is
simply to come up with a plan that will get you out of the starting gate.
You have to start with a plan, but the plan you start with will not be the plan
that gets you there. Just for emphasis, I’m going to say that once more:

You have to start with a plan, but the plan you
start with will not be the plan that gets you there.

What? That makes no sense at all! If this plan isn’t going to get me to my
goal, why bother designing it? What’s the point? Aren’t I just fooling myself with a
pointless plan?

159

160

The Slight Edge
Not at all. You need a plan to start with, the same way you need a penny to
start with before anything can double. The way you took your first baby step.
The way you furrowed your brows, pursed your lips and struggled to sound out
the first sentence you read.
Would that penny have financed an empire? Of course not. Would that
first step have won the Boston Marathon? Would that first sentence have earned
you a master’s degree in literature? No, and no, and no. But without that penny,
without that first wobbling step, without that first stumbling sentence, your
dream—no matter how deeply you wanted it—would never have materialized.

People make the mistake of thinking they need the
perfect plan. There is no perfect plan. By definition,
there can’t be, because a plan is not getting there—it’s
only your jumping-off point.

And that’s the reason you need a plan: if you have no plan, there will be no
jumping off. In fact, if you put too much energy into the plan, and make it too
perfect, you’re more likely to squelch all the life, spontaneity, intuition and joy
out of the doing of it.
Do the thing, and you shall have the power. Don’t try to figure it out! If you
want twice the success, double your rate of failure.
You start with a plan, then go through the process of continuous learning
through both study and doing, adjusting all the time through the kaizen of plan,
do, review and then adjust, like a rocket to the moon—off track ninety-seven
percent of the time, your gyroscope feeding information to your dream computer
to bring you back on track ... You need a first plan so you can get to your second
plan, so you can get to your third plan, so you can get to your fourth plan.
Success is the progressive realization of a worthy ideal. Keep holding that as
your philosophy, and you will generate the attitudes and actions you need to keep
progressively realizing a better and better plan.
Your starting plan is not the plan that will ultimately get you there ... but you
need it so you have a place to start.
In my profession, training is a huge part of what drives the business.
Training is the great equalizer: because we work with such large numbers and
such a sweeping diversity of people from all types of backgrounds and walks of
life, we train, train and train some more.
It’s not that there’s all that much to learn. It’s like learning to play the piano:
there are only twelve notes, after all. But to learn it, you need to hear it, and play it,
over and over. It’s as vivid an illustration of Slight Edge success as I’ve ever seen.

Turning Your Dreams into Reality
At the same time, I have very little regard for trainings that tell you, “This is
exactly how you have to do it,” because the actual sequence of actions and events
that works will be different for everyone, every time. You can train people in the
concepts, in how to think and what kinds of actions have worked, but you can’t
blueprint the specific sequence, because circumstances are always different.
This is why you need to have a plan to start with—but you cannot start with
the plan that will get you there. You have to start with the philosophy that will
take you; with the right philosophy, you’ll find the plan.

Step Three: Know and Pay the Price
Aha, there’s the catch! I knew it! Here comes the big sacrifice ... so, what will
I have to do? Throw away my television? Say goodbye to all fun and forgo all my
favorite foods? Give up a kidney?
Chances are, it’s not quite that dramatic. Like anything else, when it comes to
goals, we tend to see things like they’re on the big screen; but they’re not. Though
your dreams may be big (in fact, I hope they’re huge!), remember that the steps
you’re taking to get there are ... what, huge? No: small. Tiny. Baby steps. Easy to do.
The price you pay works the same way. You don’t have to pay for your
million-dollar dream with a million-dollar personal check. You can pay for it ...
well, with a penny a day. But you do need to understand what that penny is,
and you do need to pay it. Whatever the dream, whatever

the goal, there’s a price you’ll need to pay, and that
means giving up something.

It may be something as simple as giving up a type of junk food you’re
attached to, for the sake of your health; or something as subtle as giving up your
right to be right, or your habit of exerting control over conversation for the sake
of a relationship. It may mean postponing certain purchases or acquisitions,
often called “delayed gratification,” or letting go of some pleasures for the sake of
the pursuit of a longer-term aim.
At a certain point in my life, when I’d suffered some huge setbacks and lost
everything I had, I came to a critical point of decision. I’d been an athlete all my life,
and at this point I’d become part of a softball team. We were serious, and we got pretty
good. Before long, we were traveling and winning tournaments all over the place.
Then, I hit a point where I knew I had to get my career back on track. It was
time to pick up the pieces, regroup and move on. I also knew I couldn’t do this
without changing something: I had to pay a price. It was a difficult choice, but
I walked away from our softball team. My friends couldn’t believe it. “You’re

161

162

The Slight Edge
quitting?!” And I said, “Hey you guys, you’re still my friends, I love you, but get
another outfielder.” I took that same time and invested it elsewhere.
I had to plant and cultivate in a different field.
Remember, there aren’t many millionaires who bowl over 100. Why not?
Because they left the bowling league behind to build their fortunes. “Is that
too large a price to pay?” is a question only you can answer. Remember

this: whatever price you pay, there’s a bigger price to
pay for not doing it than the price for doing it. The
price of neglect is much worse than the price of the
discipline. It may take a few years to put your success
on track—but it takes your entire life to fail.
Step Four: Look at It Every Day

The single most compelling reason for writing down your dreams is so you
can look at them and read them every day. The reason you need to look at them
every day is the same reason you need to keep yourself in the company of positive
people: you need to counteract the force of gravity—or

to put a different name to it, the force of mediocrity.

Remember, it’s nineteen to one—and you need to constantly remind your
brain where it is you’re headed or you’ll drift away. If you don’t keep yourself
constantly, repeatedly focused on your destination, you’ll be like a rocket ship
without a gyroscope: you’ll simply drift off gradually into the outer space of
failure, never even coming remotely close to reaching the moon.
Surround yourself with it, keep your awareness in your face, look at it
every single day. Your brain is far more complex and powerful than the biggest
computer in the world, and your own subconscious is by far the biggest
distraction you have.
Remember how many times you heard the word “No” by the time you hit
first grade? Over 40,000 times—while you’d heard the word “Yes” only 5,000
times. Your brain has recorded an eight-to-one preponderance of “No,” which
translates into, “You can’t do it ... It will never work ... That’s impossible ... Why
even bother trying?” We all come at this business of success with an extraordinary
baggage of negative conditioning.
And that’s all right. You and I can’t live our childhoods over again, but we
don’t need to in order to fulfill our dreams. What we can do—and do need to
do—is surround ourselves with our own Yes’s. Surround yourself with messages
that tell you your dreams are real, your dreams are real, your dreams are real.

Turning Your Dreams into Reality
Having your dreams concretely spelled out, on paper, in the most vivid and
specific terms possible, and with a very tangible, concrete timeline, provides you
with an “environment of Yes!” for your goals, dreams and aspirations. And when
that nineteen-to-one force of gravity starts leaking from our subconscious and
says, “Yeah, but are they really?”—we need to respond, Yes! Yes! Yes! Yes! Yes!
Here is the amazing thing—and I’ve seen this happen so many times, yet
it never ceases to fill me with awe: when you set your goals, life has a way of
rearranging itself, a series of events starts in motion that you could never have
predicted or planned, to get you there. If you just sit there and try to figure it
out, it doesn’t happen. But when you surround yourself with your goals, your
subconscious brain goes to work on it—and if you have the right philosophy,
the philosophy of the Slight Edge, then you will come up with the right actions
and keep repeating those actions ... and a series of events will kick in, including
circumstances you could never have dreamed of, that will take you to that goal.
To give you an example, here is the true story of how I built the largest sales
and distribution forces in all of Germany for one of my past companies, which
has since become one of the largest such organizations in all of Europe and one of
the most successful in the history of that industry.

Anatomy of a Breakthrough:
How I Built a German Sales Force
One Friday morning, I woke up and turned on the TV while I was getting
dressed. On television, someone was talking about a business opportunity and
franchise show in Albuquerque. I thought, Hey, maybe I should be in that. I called
the people running the show, asked if they had an opening, they said, “Yeah,” so
I changed my plans for the day and spent the next eight or ten hours shopping
around, buying things for my booth, and making little signs and packages to
hand out.
The next morning I showed up at the franchise show and found my way
to my little booth. I’d never done this before. I was surrounded by really nice,
professional booths—and I stood in my stupid little homemade booth, trying to
hand out my little brochures. Across from me, another person with a booth was
blowing up balloons shaped like bears. There we were ... Bear Man and me.
All day long, people would come over to see the Bear Man’s balloons and
I would try to hand out my information, but nobody paid any attention to me.
I had three hundred packages to give out and hoped to get names and phone
numbers from maybe ten or twenty people—but I could not give my stuff away.

163

164

The Slight Edge
Finally, I found a line that worked. As one person walked past me to go see the
Bear Man’s balloons, I caught his eye and said, “Would you be interested in some
great propaganda?” He stopped and laughed, and said, “Sure.” I used that line for
the entire weekend, gave out all three hundred packages and got about twenty names.
One of them happened to be a doctor named Shapiro. The next week, I
called Dr. Shapiro; we had a pleasant conversation, but nothing happened as a
result. I called him again, and kept calling him. After about a month and a half
of following up with him, he came to meet with me, liked what he saw, and got
involved with my business.
About this same time, I learned that our company was planning to open in
Germany in about six months. I got my Mastermind group together and said,
“Guys, this is it, we’re going to open up Germany.” They said, “How?” I had no
idea how. The only thing I knew how to do was double my rate of failure ... Do the
thing and have the power. We thought about it, and I decided what we needed to
do was find Germans.
So at our meetings, we began teaching this amazing, sophisticated strategy
we had developed: Find Germans.
Eventually somebody came up with the idea of dropping in on the local
Mercedes dealership; someone else visited the local German club. One by one,
ideas started to percolate.
About two weeks later, Dr. Shapiro showed up at a meeting and said, “Hey,
I found a German.” I asked him, “What do you mean?” He said, “I’m talking
to my neighbor while he’s mowing his lawn and I say, ‘Hey by the way, Bob, do
you know any Germans?’ and he says, ‘Well, yeah, I know a guy who lives in
Germany,’ and I say, ‘Really?!’ ”
I told Dr. Shapiro to send this German person all my information because
I was planning to go over there in a few months. He said, “Hey, Jeff, aren’t you
speaking over in Miami in a few months?” Yes, I was. “Well, this guy’s coming
over to the US and I think he’s going to be in Miami then, too!”
A few months later, I go to Miami and sure enough, this fellow comes up to me
afterward and talks to me: his name is Vin, he’s from Germany, and he gets quite
excited about going back to Germany and helping us open up there in a few months.
Except after Vin flies back to Germany, three months go by—and the
company doesn’t open in Germany after all. We have to delay the opening by at
least another three or four months.
So I call Vin and tell him, “Hey, we’re open in England, why don’t you go over
to England and start working over there? You can get some practice, and then when
Germany does open up, you’ll already know the ropes and be really ready.”

Turning Your Dreams into Reality
So Vin and his wife Birgitte go to England, rent a little flat and start
working there.
Now, one day Vin and Birgitte are walking around England when they
happen to stop to talk to a man who’s painting a house. As they get talking, they
ask him, “Hey, do you know anybody in Germany?” and he says, “Oh, yeah, I
know this guy in Germany, he’s really successful there.”
Months later, when I finally get to Germany, I go from city to city, meeting
with people in hotel lobby after hotel lobby—Hamburg, Düsseldorf, Cologne,
Heidelberg, Munich, Frankfurt ... I don’t know a thing about Germany, and I
don’t speak a word of German. But Vin and the housepainter’s friend go with
me, side by side, the whole time translating and helping me out, showing me
around. At first, I’ll be speaking to a group, then Vin will translate, then I’ll say
something else, then he’ll translate. But soon something odd starts happening:
I’ll say something—and then he takes off in rapid-fire German and talks for five
minutes straight before coming up for air. He doesn’t need me to say anything
else; he’s doing fine without me!
By the time I left Frankfurt, we had launched Germany—and today those
two men are both multimillionaires, with sales forces in all of Europe.
Now, here’s the question I want to ask you: how did I plan that?! Maybe it
was like this:
One day, I was sitting on my bed, putting on my socks, and mumbling to
myself, Now how can I build a huge European sales force? I thought about that for
a while, then slapped my forehead and said, “I got it! All I need to do is turn on
the TV, they’ll probably be talking about a franchise show—
“And if I go to the franchise show, chances are really good that I’ll be
stuck in a corner with some guy called the Bear Man who’ll take everyone’s
attention off me so I won’t have any success handing out my little brochures,
which will make me figure out that what I should say to people is something
like, ‘Hey, would you be interested in some propaganda?’ and if I do that not
only will I hand out all three hundred of my little packages but I’ll also get
about twenty names—
“And one of those names will be a doctor from Albuquerque who won’t
really be that interested at first, but even though it could take me, oh, about three
weeks of calling him, maybe the doctor will finally show up when I’m teaching
people about how to ask everyone if they know any Germans, and this doctor will
ask his next-door neighbor one day while he’s cutting his grass (and it’s a good
thing it won’t be raining that day, because then this carefully laid plan won’t
work) if he happens to know any Germans—

165

166

The Slight Edge
“And he will! He’ll know this one person who not only lives in Germany,
but happens to be coming over to Miami at the same time I’m going over there,
which will work really well—
“Because even though he’ll go back to Germany all excited about opening
up there, if this plan works just right then that won’t happen because it’ll turn out
that the company isn’t ready to open up in Germany yet after all and that’ll be
just perfect because then I’ll tell this guy, ‘Hey, why don’t you go over to England
instead for a few months?’ which my guess is he’ll probably go ahead and do,
maybe even renting a flat with his wife.
“Which will be just perfect, just like I planned it, because one day when they’re
walking, they’ll walk right past this house, which will be timed just right (because
as luck would have it, it won’t be raining on that day either!) so they’ll stop and
strike up a conversation with this housepainter, which is perfect because I will have
trained them to ask, ‘Hey, do you know any Germans?’ so they’ll ask that question
and if this all goes just according to my plan then the housepainter won’t even have
to stop and think about it ’cause he’ll just say, ‘Yes, actually, I do know a fellow in
Germany, and in fact he’s quite a successful bloke over there,’ and that’ll be perfect
too because when I do finally get over there to Hamburg, even though it will look
like I don’t have the slightest clue about what I am trying to accomplish in Germany,
the truth is that this guy who met me in Miami (the franchise show doctor’s nextdoor-neighbor’s friend) and the successful guy in Germany (the guy that the Miami
guy’s neighborhood housepainter knows) will meet me in the hotel and travel with
me as my translators and because they’ll be translating for me they’ll understand the
business better than anyone else I talk to by the end of visit—
“And then maybe those two guys will go on to build the largest sales and
marketing organization in Germany, and one of the largest in all of Europe.
“Yeah ... ” and I nodded sagely. “That should work ... Good plan, Olson!”
And I finished putting on my socks and shoes.
Do you think that’s how it happened? Of course not! Then how did it?
The truth is, I started with a plan. My plan was this: I told people to ask
others, “Do you know any Germans?” That was it. That was the plan.
And you know, it worked. A simple plan—you could even say, it was so
simple it looked stupid. But if you start with a plan, and you practice those simple
daily disciplines ... one plan leads to the next plan, leads to the next plan—
Can you imagine how many times this ridiculously unlikely chain of events
could have fallen apart? (Twice, an innocuous afternoon rain shower would have
scuttled it!) Why didn’t it? Because we started with a plan, and then allowed the
Slight Edge to work.

Turning Your Dreams into Reality
Until one is committed there is always hesitancy, the chance to draw back,
always ineffectiveness. Concerning all acts of initiative (and creation), there is one
elementary truth, the ignorance of which kills countless ideas and splendid plans;
that the moment one definitely commits oneself, then Providence moves too. All
sorts of things occur to help one that would never otherwise have occurred. A
whole stream of events issues from the decision, raising in one’s favor all manner
of unforeseen incidents and meetings and material assistance, which no man
could have dreamt would have come his way.
I have learned a great respect for one of Goethe’s couplets:

Whatever you can do, or dream you can, begin it.
Boldness has genius, power and magic in it.
— W. H. Murray, The Second Himalayan Expedition

A whole stream of events ... which no man could have dreamt would have come
his way. That strikes me as a very good description of how our German sales force
came into being.
Don’t try to figure out the whole race. Just figure out where to put your foot
for the starting line. Just start. The result looks incredibly complex, but it’s not;
it never is. It’s always the simple little things that take you there.
Everything you do, every decision you make, is either building your dream
or building someone else’s dream. Every single thing you do is either leading you
away from the masses—or leading you away with the masses! Every single thing
you do is a Slight Edge decision.
Our strategy for opening Germany seemed so ridiculously simple. What
made the difference was that we did it every day. Did we have success in Germany
after one day, one week, even one month? Of course not. We had nothing ... just a
few names. And suddenly one day, those few names had blanketed Europe with
a financial empire.
Just like the water hyacinth.

Key Points of Chapter 11
They are the four universal truths of reaching for a big dream.
For a goal to come true:
• You must write it down, make it specific and give it a deadline.
• You must have a plan to start with.
• You must understand and pay the price.
• You must look at it every day.

167

168

The Slight Edge

After many years of working in the real estate industry, I woke up one
morning and realized I couldn’t do it anymore. I was almost 40 years old,
and already in full burn out mode. I took a vacation to Montana to try to
rejuvenate and fell in love with ‘big sky country’ as it is called by many.
Everything about the mountains and rivers spoke to me, and I knew that
this was where I was going to live someday. I went back to Texas, left
the real estate industry and began my own business, rejuvenated by the
dream of ‘big sky country.’ I dedicated myself to consistent daily actions
and modeling myself after others who were successful.
I started dreaming big, real big. Real, real big. It was exciting. I thought
about a ranch in Montana in the mountains, backing up to thousands
of Forest Service acres with trees, rivers and streams running through
the property. I would have horses, of course, and lots of room for all my
friends and family to visit and enjoy. I would build a ‘convention center’
on the property so I could have retreats for women and hold family
reunions there all right there at the ‘ranch.’ Of course the reality of my
living conditions at the time of that dream was pretty stark in comparison,
but I didn’t pay attention to where I was at that time. Instead I focused
100 percent on where I was going to be in five to 10 years. I looked at my
goals every day and envisioned myself attaining them.
For years I poured over floor plans for my dream home. And all through
those years of planning and dreaming for the future, I kept working on my
business steadily and with intensity.
Then, you guessed it. One day I was taking a Sunday afternoon drive to
look at the aspen trees turning gold in the fall and literally drove up to
my dream place. It was in the middle of the national forest, with lots of
trees and a stream running beside it. And right on the fence post by the
gate was a for sale by owner sign. I drove up the hill and knocked on the
door, and as they say, ‘the rest is history’. Within 30 days I had purchased
a beautiful 80-acre property that looked exactly like what I have been
envisioning for over 10 years! I spent a year renovating the house to get it
exactly like all the pictures I had collected over the years.
A lot of my friends and family wondered how did she do it? I can tell you
exactly how it was done: by applying the Slight Edge in every part of my
life. From my beliefs, philosophies, actions, disciplines, every single day.
I changed language from ‘can’t, maybe, don’t know’ to ‘can, sure, I
will figure it out.’ I changed my thought pattern and when faced with
disappointment or so-called failure I asked myself, “What did you learn?
The Slight Edge philosophy is life altering and now I am passing it on. I am
teaching my children and grandchildren the same principles so they can
be as blessed as I have been.
I hope you dream big and go for your dreams with your whole heart. If
you will consistently apply the Slight Edge in every decision you make you
will realize them very soon.

—Kathy Aaron, Helena, MT

CHAPTER 12

Living the Slight Edge

Gentlemen, this is a football.
— Vince Lombardi

With these words, the legendary football coach would begin each new season of
training, never taking anything for granted and always viewing each of his players as a
blank slate, despite the fact that they were all seasoned pros. The first time Lombardi
uttered this famous line, Green Bay Packer great Max McGee delivered his own
immortal retort: “Uh, Coach, could you slow down a little? You’re going too fast for
us,” and got a chuckle even from the unflappable Lombardi.
The contemporary business world has an expression for this mindset: “Assume
nothing.” The Zen Buddhists call it “beginner’s mind.” It’s a mindset of humility and
fresh inquiry, always looking for the most meaning and importance in the smallest
things. I can’t think of a better or more eloquent way of expressing it than, “Gentlemen,
this is a football.”
No matter how great your aspirations, how tall the dream and great the leap it
means, the eternally repeating truth of the Slight Edge is that it is always built of
small, simple steps. Easy to do—and just as easy not to do. Don’t go too fast, and
don’t be too proud to stop, look at your life, and tell yourself, “This is a football.”
To the coach, the football was the single step that begins the thousand-mile journey.
The football was Lombardi’s penny.
Now it’s time to find yours.
What one simple, single, easy-to-do activity can you do, day in and day out,
that will have the greatest impact on your health; your personal development; your
relationships; your finances; and your life itself?

170

The Slight Edge
In this next section, I’ll ask you to walk yourself through these five areas of
your life, one by one, to examine what they mean to you and where your dreams lie
in each; and then lay out for yourself your dreams as goals (specific, vivid and with
a timeline); the price you’re willing to pay; a plan to start; and finally, one simple
daily discipline that you will commit to doing each and every day from now on.
Go ahead, now, and take this stroll through your life; take a pencil as a
walking stick.

The Slight Edge and Your Health

Tell me what you eat and I will tell you what you are.
— Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin

They say “the way to a man’s heart is through his stomach.” I don’t know
about that, but I do know this: that is the way to his destiny!
Health is one of the great riddles of existence. The foundational importance
of everyday health is one of the most commonly known truths of human existence,
and at the same time, it is also one of the most commonly and blatantly ignored.
Everyone knows that “if you don’t have your health, you have nothing.” Our
language is brimming over with related figures of speech:
At least you have your health.
You’re only as old as you feel.
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
Of the three “self-evident, inalienable rights” that ring from the American
Declaration of Independence like a trumpet fanfare—“Life, Liberty and the
pursuit of Happiness”—the first, without which the other two are irrelevant, is
Life. And the most basic condition for the free, unencumbered experience of Life
itself is health. There is nothing more basic than health—and there is no area of
life where the Slight Edge is more vividly in operation, working either for you or
against you.
That is perhaps your most important choice, day by day and hour by hour:
whether to let your eating and physical activity build your fondest dreams—or
dig your grave with your teeth. Hamlet wondered, “To be, or not to be?” You get
to ask yourself that—and answer it—with every meal.
I always start with the area of health because when I’m in good physical
shape I need less sleep, think more clearly, feel better about everything, and get
more accomplished.

Living the Slight Edge 171
My simple daily discipline for my health is to exercise for at least half an hour.
When I started doing this, I have to admit, it didn’t thrill me. That first
day I went running was a real drag. I’d let myself go physically; it was harder
than I’d expected it would be. That first day I ran for only about ten minutes;
then over the next several weeks, I slowly worked my way up to my daily half
hour. But even before that first week was over, I actually felt better than I had
in months.
I usually say that the Slight Edge does not work quickly, but the truth is
that often you’ll get positive results fairly quickly. You may not achieve your
ultimate goal in a week, a month or even a year or two, but you’ll see the
positive changes far sooner than you might expect. That’s the way it was with
my running.
I’ve said that successful people are willing to do those things unsuccessful
people are not. And sometimes those things are uncomfortable. There is always
a price you pay, and for me the price included my initial discomfort. But that
price was quickly paid in full, and within weeks that discomfort faded. Now I’m
uncomfortable when I don’t run!
Another great example comes from The Slight Edge reader Amber Thiel of
Seattle. Her friend adamantly recommended The Slight Edge to her. As she read
the book, she knew why her friend had put the book into her hands, she was a living
example of applying the Slight Edge principles toward health. Here is her story:
The principles in The Slight Edge exemplified the EXACT approach
we were using to teach people how to get to their ideal health and weight.
We focused on empowering people to make small decisions every day, taking
the focus away from the scale and focusing on the journey instead. It’s not
the one unhealthy meal or one skipped workout that causes you to gain 25
pounds; it’s the daily unhealthy decisions that add up over the course of a
year or two that causes the 25 pounds.
The same principle applies to release 25 pounds. It’s not one or two
healthy decisions, but the compounding effect of daily healthy decisions
over a long period of time. Soon after reading The Slight Edge, we decided
to launch our “home health seminars” into a business that now touches
individuals and families all over the world in their health. The name for
our company became The Healthy Edge, inspired by The Slight Edge.
The foundation of The Healthy Edge is five daily goals that, when done
consistently, transform people’s health, attitude, esteem and weight.
—Amber Thiel, Seattle, WA

172

The Slight Edge
Amber is in great company, along with the many doctors who have written
in to us to explain how they have incorporated Slight Edge principles into the
health regimen they recommend to their patients. Taking control of your health
is just a few daily actions away.
Those Slight Edge actions that are easy to do, and easy not to do? Soon,
thanks to the powers of momentum, completion and habit, they become far
easier to do than not to do!
Take a few moments to work out your own Slight Edge plan for your health.
You don’t need to feel limited or constricted by this exercise; you can always
change and modify what you write here. Use a pencil! But do yourself a favor:
don’t skip over this and read on to the next step. Actually take the time to fill
out each section, at least with some solid ideas to start with. You can always add
to it and refine it later. In fact, you’ll have to! That’s how the Slight Edge works:
you’re not supposed to get it perfect the first time.
My dreams for my health (specific, vivid and with a timeline):

Price to pay:

Plan to start:

One simple daily discipline:

Living the Slight Edge 173

The Slight Edge and Your Personal Development

You will become as small as your controlling desire,
or as great as your dominant aspiration.
— James Allen, As a Man Thinketh

If you could wave a magic wand and have either a million dollars in the bank
or a million-dollar mindset, which would you choose? I wouldn’t hesitate for an
instant: I’d rather be worth it than have it. Why? Because if I’m penniless but
I have a million-dollar mindset, then it won’t be long before I have the million
dollars. But even if I don’t have a million-dollar mindset, even with a cool million
in the bank, it won’t be long before I’m back to being penniless again!
Your income will never long exceed your own level of personal development.
It may take a jump through happy circumstance or a lucky break—but if your own
development does not quickly rise to meet that new level, it will quickly bounce
back to the level where your personal development limits it, sure as if it were on a
rubber band.
The same is true of your health; and of your relationships; and of your career;
and of every aspect of your life. Over the long term, the limiting factor is never
circumstance or fate; the limiting factor is always you. In the same way, and for the
same reasons, the limitless scope of possibilities is also defined by one factor: you.
You already know of my passion for this area, and my number one Slight
Edge recommendation. I teach everyone I work with to read at least ten pages
of a powerful, life-transforming book each and every day. At the back of this
book, I provide a list of some of my favorites; please add to it. Building your
own personal self-improvement library may be the single most valuable and
important investment (after your personal health) that you can make.
In addition to reading ten pages a day, I also teach people to listen to a selfimprovement CD or audio download for at least fifteen minutes every day. The
average person spends between 250 and 350 hours every year driving to and from
this place and that. That’s about forty minutes to an hour each and every day.
If you spend that time listening to educational and self-improvement material,
you’ll have the equivalent of a Ph.D. on any subject you choose in just a few
years. That’s the Slight Edge.
When you’re in your car, you can listen to music; but why build Kenney
Chesney’s dream (even though he is my favorite!) or Taylor Swift’s dream
when you could be building your own? Listen to Jim Rohn’s audio programs;
he’s a master at helping you build your dreams. Turn your car into

174

The Slight Edge

a drive-time university! There are hundreds of powerful, masterful
men and women to choose from. But you do have to make the choice.
I run with an iPod® and a headset, so I’m listening to audios while I run,
which doubles my improvement. I travel quite a bit; when I do, I always pack
my running shoes and iPod—so my Slight Edge half-hour run goes with me no
matter where I travel.
Because I double my time by listening to audios while I run, I also get to
work directly on my personal development. Like health, this is a fundamental
area for me, and is so powerful that it influences everything else going on in my
life. When I first added the iPod to my daily run (in those days it was a Walkman),
I started noticing positive changes in every other area of my life within the first
couple of months.
Is it easy to do? Easy not to do? And if you don’t do it, what will happen
today? But that simple error in judgment, compounded over time, will leave you
a willing participant in the conspiracy of mediocrity that nibbles away at the
hopes, dreams and aspirations of the ninety-five percent who live out their days
under the curse of Thoreau’s famous epitaph for humanity (from Walden): “The
mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.”
Listening to audio CDs is an especially powerful Slight Edge tool because it
can turn your “down time” into up time and double your productivity. You can
drive to the store, or work or school; you can jog, roller-blade, bike or walk; sit
on planes, stand in line, pedal, row, ski, stretch and lift weights—all the while
feeding your mind through life-transforming information.
And when you spend this time listening to true masters of the skills you seek
to learn, you are using the third and most powerful method of learning: learning
by modeling a mentor.
Take a few moments to work out your own Slight Edge plan for your personal
development. Again, you need not feel limited or constricted by this exercise; you
can always change and modify what you write here. But don’t skip on to the next
step: do yourself a favor and put down some initial thoughts. Use a pencil!
My dreams for my personal development (specific, vivid and with
a timeline):

Living the Slight Edge 175
Price to pay:

Plan to start:

One simple daily discipline:

The Slight Edge and Your Relationships

No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a
piece of the continent, a part of the main. If a clod be
washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as
if promontory were, as well as if a manor of thy friend’s
or of thine own were. Any man’s death diminishes me,
because I am involved in mankind; and therefore never
send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.
— John Donne, Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions

One of the great ironic truths of human existence is that no matter how
great our accomplishments, it is ultimately other people who give it meaning.
One reason that Citizen Kane continues to rank among the greatest films ever
made even today, more than sixty years after it was made, is that it makes such a
powerful statement of this truth: despite all his larger-than-life accomplishments,
his millions, his international power as king-maker and -breaker, in the final hour

176

The Slight Edge
of his life, Charles Foster Kane was consumed by a single thought: anguish over
being ripped from his childhood and thrust into the world alone at the age of eight.
The “great man” had no one to share his conquests and accomplishments with.
Earlier in this chapter, I wrote that the importance of health is “one of the
most commonly known truths of human existence—and also one of the most
commonly and blatantly ignored.” The same can be said for the importance of
relationships. How often have you heard of a successful businessperson who
achieved great financial success only at the expense of those two most precious
assets, good health and a rich family life?
When writing about the Law of Associations, I mentioned the importance
of who you associate with in terms of its strategic effect on you. But there is a
greater truth about your associations, too, because the relationships you choose
are not only a means to an end, they are also an end in themselves. All the success
in the world, as Charles Foster Kane learned, means little if there is no one to
share it with.
Relationships, too, are both built up and torn down in the subtlest ways.
Because most people are not aware of the Slight Edge, the progress of their
relationships tends to be a mystery. What makes a marriage grow richer over the
years for one couple, and grow stale, empty and bitter for another? Nine times
out of ten—or better, nineteen times out of twenty—there is no single, significant
answer. It is the little things, day by day, that add up over time to unshakable
happiness or unsalvageable misery.
You’ve no doubt heard the expression, “It’s the little things that count.” There
could scarcely be a more succinct statement of the Slight Edge—and chances are,
you’ve heard it said in the context of a relationship. The remembered birthdays,
the little gifts, the gestures, the kind words, the remembered favorite color. The
five minutes, snatched from an impossibly hectic day, to drop everything and
hear the other’s news. The word of encouragement; the reminder of your own
belief in the other person. The listening.
It’s been said that the most important statements of friendship are usually
spoken with five words or less. That is the wisdom of the Slight Edge: those tiny
thoughts and gestures that are startlingly easy to do ... and tragically easy not to do.
The future of every relationship you have, like that of your health, is a choice
that is always in your hands, and it’s no bigger than a penny. The key is to make
the choice—and keep making it.
A special category of relationships, of course, is family. If you have children,
you probably already know that they are in many ways your greatest legacy. No
matter what the state of the educational system (and regardless of the decade or

Living the Slight Edge 177
generation you’re looking at, it always seems to be in a state of crisis!), the single
most powerful influence on children will always be the people who raise them.
My daughter Amber has unusually high self-esteem. This is no accident;
in fact, it is a blessing I owe to the Slight Edge. When Amber was little, my wife
and I knew that no matter how much we might want to, we could not change
the 40,000 “No’s” she was going to experience. That’s what parents do: we set
boundaries. The “No’s” are something we do to protect our kids. That’s our job.
We couldn’t change the number of “No’s”—but we could change the
number of “Yes’s.” And that is exactly what we did.
One of the greatest gifts you can give your children is more “Yes’s.” So every
time we said “No,” we found a way also to say “Yes.” By the time Amber went to
school, she brought with her some 40,000 “No’s,” but she also brought with her
something to the tune of 160,000 “Yes’s”—four times as many Yes’s as No’s. It
changed her philosophy and her view of life. It changed her view of herself. As a
result, it will change her entire life.
Though children are special, they are not unique in this respect: they are
human beings, and so is everyone else. What kind of influence can you have on
people simply by providing them with more “Yes’s”? More influence than you
can possibly imagine.
I want you to hear from Renee, Amber’s mother and my best friend, because
she consistently applies the Slight Edge to relationships better than anyone I
have encountered:
My first Slight Edge experience began as a child watching my mother
interact with everyone around her. She made a difference every day, with
friends and strangers alike. We didn’t know what it was at the time, but
it was definitely the Slight Edge in action. I didn’t inherit her gregarious
personality, but I did inherit her heart for people.
I have made it a habit to be present with whomever I happen to be
with. To take an interest in them and what is going on in their world, to ask
questions, and most important, to give encouragement for a job well done,
to notice and comment on what is right, and not what is wrong. I do this
even with strangers that I might possibly never see again, for sales clerks,
wait staff, and people I come across during my daily activities.
I don’t know how this affects the people I encounter, except to know
that so often people who are checking me out at the grocery store will spill
their hearts and tell me so much of their personal lives, because for a
moment, I took an interest in them.

178

The Slight Edge
We never know what people may need at any given point, and a
smile, a moment, a sincere question about their lives, someone to listen,
might just be exactly what a person needs. It is one of those Slight Edge
disciplines. It would be so easy not to talk to them, to be caught up in
my own thoughts, to not have an interest outside of myself. But as this
phenomenon called the Slight Edge catches on, what if we used it beyond
ourselves, what if we used it to create a positive moment for all who
cross our paths. It would eventually start to mess with the negativity and
indifference that so often greets us.
I try to do the same but on a much bigger scale with my friends and
family. Once my daughter was born, I felt as if I had begun the most important
job of my lifetime. I have practiced the Slight Edge with her, in every way
imaginable, with the best possible results. My encouraging, positive, you-cando-anything attitude has been practiced more on her than on anyone else in my
life, from the time she was born. (She is an only child, so no one got left out!)
With children it is often so much easier to take the path of least
resistance, to let them eat that fast food they love rather than cook something
healthy, to let them watch TV rather than read to them, to let them play
video games rather than to interact with them. I worked to make the Slight
Edge decision every day in every way with her, and it has paid off in a big
way. She is now an adult, a woman who knows she can do anything she sets
her mind to. I can’t really list the ways it has paid off without sounding like
a typical proud mother, but I think you can imagine the outcome!
I can no longer make the Slight Edge decisions for her, but the
wonderful result is that now she is making her own Slight Edge decisions,
and I am sure she will pass those on to her children.

Everything You Do Is Important
Toss a rock into a pond, and you’ll see ripples from its impact spreading
out until they reach the opposite shore. The same thing happens in life—only in
most cases, you never see those ripples.
Everything you do is important. When you smile at a child and encourage
him, or scold him and tell him he’s no good—in either case, you may see the
splash it makes, and you may see the first or second ripple, but the impact goes
far, far beyond what you see. You don’t see all the ripples.
You teach someone to read ten pages of a good book a day, and you may see
how it changes her, but chances are you won’t see how it changes her kids, and

Living the Slight Edge 179
her kids’ friends, and their friends. And as these ripples spread out, they grow
bigger! For better or for worse, with positive impact or negative impact, even
your smallest actions create a ripple effect that has an incalculably great impact
on the world around you.
No doubt, you recognize this description of the “ripple effect”—it’s our old
friend, the Slight Edge.
Now, take a little time to think about the relationships in your life, and jot
down a few thoughts about how you might work out your own Slight Edge plan
for deepening, strengthening and enriching those relationships. This is perhaps
the most personal area of the five, and if you feel safer (since someone else might
later be reading this copy of The Slight Edge), copy the worksheet below into a
diary or journal, and fill in your answers there. Either way, do take the time to
give it some thought and come up with your own answers. This is your life; this
is the reason you’re reading this book.
My dreams for my relationships (specific, vivid and with a timeline):

Price to pay:

Plan to start:

One simple daily discipline:

180

The Slight Edge

The Slight Edge and Your Finances

Winning is a habit. Unfortunately, so is losing.
— Vince Lombardi

It’s no accident that our exploration of the Slight Edge began with the story
of a penny doubled. The world of finance is one of the easiest places to see,
objectively and logically, the power of the Slight Edge in action. Everyone knows
about the power of compound interest, right?
Wrong. Everyone thinks they know about the power of compound interest;
but most don’t, not really. How many really do understand this power? Five
percent ... the ones on the success curve side of the Slight Edge.
Remember the Pareto Principle as applied to your goals deadlines? “Eighty
percent of everything you do tends to get done in the last twenty percent of the
time available.” There’s a similar law at work in most people’s finances, only
it’s worse. It’s Parkinson’s Law (coined by Prof. Cyril Northcote Parkinson):
“Work expands to fill the time available for its completion.” As applied to
personal finances, it goes like this: Whatever I have, I spend. And for the last few
generations, where easy-to-get consumer credit has flourished like weeds, it has
come to be more like, Whatever I have, I spend a little more!
There is some good news here; recently , the common sense of Slight Edge
personal finances has started making a comeback. The book The Millionaire Next
Door bucked the trend toward flashier, Donald Trump–style how-to finance books
and instead gave example after example of how a cross-section of extraordinarily
ordinary people became wealthy—without inheritance, without high-paying
jobs, without making a killing in the stock market, without any of the usual
“breakthrough” paths to riches, but by doing simple, easy things every day.
The first of its seven rules was, “Always live below your means.” The book
became a runaway best-seller.
When Stanley and Danko’s book came out, my friends started reading it
and calling me up, one by one, and saying, “Hey, Jeff, I just read this book,
and it’s about you!” For years, I kept our family living on $4,000 a month,
no matter how much my income increased, and I wouldn’t let us raise that
monthly threshold until I had a million dollars (after taxes) in the bank. Then
I raised it to $5,000!
“Living below your means” is a classic Slight Edge strategy.
You know where I got this Slight Edge financial philosophy from? Someone
very dear to me: my mom! My mom worked for the majority of her career at a

Living the Slight Edge 181
Methodist church. She worked hard and saved wisely. When she was nearing
retirement we were discussing her future when she modestly told me that she had
saved through the years and was retiring as a millionaire! I was floored! Here was
a millionaire next door that I never even knew about!
David Bach’s The Automatic Millionaire, continued in the same vein, and
this book, along with his other titles (Smart Women Finish Rich, Smart Couples
Finish Rich and Start Late Finish Rich), as well as his appearances on The Oprah
Winfrey Show, have brought Bach’s common sense, Slight Edge financial advice
into millions of households.
I’ll bet you already have some very concrete thoughts about this area!
Perhaps you’ve even been working this part out in the back of your mind ever
since you read the story of the wealthy man and his two sons. Now’s the time to
start putting some of your thoughts to paper, and sketch out an initial plan for
realizing your financial dreams and goals.
My dreams for my finances (specific, vivid and with a timeline):

Price to pay:

Plan to start:

182

The Slight Edge
One simple daily discipline:

The Slight Edge and Your Life!
There are only two paths in life. While we are traversing them, and especially
in the earlier stages of the journey, they can often look alike, because appearances
can be deceiving (and almost always are!). But they lead ultimately to very
different places. One path leads to regret; the other leads to fulfillment.
In a typical goal-setting workshop, participants are often asked to set goals
for a year ahead, five years, even ten years ahead. I went to a seminar once that
had a unique approach: we were asked to set one-hundred-year goals!
What kind of goal would you set for one hundred years from now? What
kind of impact can you imagine yourself having on the world that will last long
after your own life has run its course? What will people remember you for after
you have come and gone?
What impact do you wish to have on the world?
I used to ask people to think about their careers, their social and community
activities, and their spiritual lives as distinct, different areas, much like their
health and finances. I’ve come to look at this a little differently; I have realized
that I would rather ask a larger question that embraces all these—career, social
impact and spiritual life—as well as many others:
What do I want my life to mean?
This is the biggest area of all, because it includes all the others. Don’t let
it’s sheer size and scope intimidate you. After all, what we’re looking for here
is simple, little things you can do every day—things that are as easy to do, as
they are not to do. The key is not to spend too much time on this. Do the thing,
and you shall have the power. Go ahead: take a pencil in hand and sketch it out.
Remember, it’s your life; what would you like it to mean?
And remember this, too, no matter how lofty or long-term your life dreams
may seem: “Gentlemen, this is a football.” It starts with a penny. Start finding
your pennies.

Living the Slight Edge 183
My dreams for my life (specific, vivid and with a timeline):

Price to pay:

Plan to start:

One simple daily discipline:

Key Points of Chapter 12
What one simple, single, easy-to-do activity can you do, day in and day out,
that will have the greatest impact on your health; your personal development; your
relationships; your finances; and your life itself?
Examine what they mean to you and where your dreams lie in each; and then lay
out for yourself your dreams as goals (specific, vivid and with a timeline); the price
you’re willing to pay; a plan to start; and finally, one simple daily discipline that you
will commit to doing each and every day from now on.

184

The Slight Edge

Usually, break-ups are considered by most as one of the most painful
experiences a person can ever encounter. When my relationship of
five years came to an end, I did some soul searching and relived every
moment I realized that I had not shared my voice in my relationship
and I did not want that pattern to continue. I became inspired by
this time in my life and began to become the authentic total female
package. So with complete faith, I made another step, a decision. I
would share my insights with every woman I know because at the end
of the day every woman is already, The Total Female Package, and
has all of the answers she needs inside of her to live her best life.
My break-up turned out to be a blessing because my first solo book
project, The Total Female Package, which is based on the 13 mirrors
that every woman possesses, took form, and for the past two years I
have been working on building the movement around its message.
I completed the manuscript over six months in a total of 40 hours. I
broke up the days I would write so I didn’t feel overwhelmed by the
project in addition to my present commitments. I began to share it with
everyone I knew, word of mouth, social media, emailing, and every
bite-size chunk of action moving it forward helped. I started to receive
calls asking me to speak at events and recently co-founded a women
empowering women community to share the 13 mirrors, which has
grown to six cities.
The mirrors have a life of their own now and I can honestly attribute it
to taking small manageable steps along my journey. The key was in
allowing the magic to come from taking action with Slight Edge moves
daily and not getting discouraged. Right now, inside of you, you may
have a really big dream and it may seem out of reach. When you
break it into bite size chunks, manageable steps, anything is possible.
One day with time, you will wake up in the midst of what seems like a
quantum leap in your life but in reality is an idea or dream you nurtured
by expressing your faith in action daily. The simple Slight Edge formula
has made all the difference in achieving my goals and it can for you
too if put into practice.

—Novalena Betancourt, San Diego, CA

CHAPTER 13

Where to Go from Here

Some day, when I have the time, I’m going to ... Some day, when I have
the money, I’m going to ...
Have you ever said that? “Some day ... ” It’s a way we have of reinforcing
the illusion that the future is safely far removed, that it doesn’t really touch
us. It’s a lie. Not an intentional, willful deception, but a lie nonetheless.
Let’s say that, “some day,” I’m going to travel around the world. If that’s
really true, if I absolutely intend for that to happen, then I’m making plans.
If it’s not practical today for me to just up and circumnavigate, I can look at
what needs to happen first, and second, and third, to end up with that result.
When I set that process in motion, the words “some day ... ” disappear.
I’m making it happen today, right now. In a very real sense, I am already
taking the trip. It may be three years before we actually take the trip, but the
words “some day ... ” no longer apply, so I stop using them.
When I say “some day ... ” I’m not really talking about the future.
The future is a reality that I’m connected to by what I’m doing right now.
“Some day ... ” is about some vague possibility that I’m not taking seriously.
“Some day ... ” is not a vision of my future. “Some day ... ” is a fantasy—
nothing more.
Here’s the damage we do with this illusion. We give weight to our
“some day ... ” fantasies; we squeeze some sense of enjoyment from them as
if they were real—and thereby give ourselves permission to take no practical
action whatsoever while we swim in the comforting sense that those some-day
scenarios will move closer to the unfolding present on their own.

They won’t. The wistful, wouldn’t-it-be-nice pretendings of maybefutures do not insert themselves into your reality of their own accord.
You’ve got to go claim them. Ask yourself: “What is there in my life that
I hold as ‘Some day ... ’?”
Some day ... The eighth day of the week. The only day that never comes.
This is the day—this one. Right here. Right now.
— John David Mann, The Eighth Day of the Week

Abraham Lincoln spoke about taking twice as long to sharpen the axe as to
hack at the tree. In your life, you are the axe; the Slight Edge is how you sharpen
it. Sharpen yourself and pursue your path through those simple, small, easy
disciplines, and compounded over time, they will take you to the top.
Do one simple, daily discipline in each of these five key areas of your life—
your health, your personal development, your relationships (which includes
family), your finances, and your life overall (which includes the meaning and
purpose of your life)—that forwards your success in each of those areas ...
Make a habit of doing some sort of daily review of these Slight Edge
activities, either through keeping a journal, a list, working with a Slight Edge
buddy, a coach, or some other regular, consistent means ...
Spend high-quality time with men and women who have achieved goals and
dreams similar to yours; in other words, model successful mentors, teachers,
gurus, masters and allies, and do it daily, weekly and monthly ...
... and you will find yourself on the success curve—and you will turn your
dreams into realities.
Successful people do what unsuccessful people are not willing to do; they
put the Slight Edge to work for them, rather than against them, every day. They
refuse to let themselves be swayed by their feelings, moods or attitudes; they rule
their lives by their philosophies, and do what it takes to get the job done, whether
they feel like it or not.
Successful people don’t look for shortcuts, nor do they hope for the “big
breakthrough.” They are always open to quantum leaps, knowing that such
opportune moments do present themselves from time to time, but they focus on
sticking to their knitting and doing what they’ve put in front of themselves to do.
They step onto the path of mastery and once having set foot there, they stay on
that path throughout their lives.
Successful people never blame circumstances or other people; instead,
they take full responsibility for their lives. They use the past as a lesson but
do not dwell in it, and instead, let themselves be pulled up and forward by the

Where to Go from Here
compelling force of the future. They know that the path that leads to the success
curve and the one that leads to the failure curve are only a hair’s breadth apart,
separated only by the distinction of simple, “insignificant” actions that are just
as easy not to do as they are to do—and that this difference will ultimately make
all the difference.
Successful people know how to use the natural tension to close the gap from
point A, where they are, to point B, where they want to be. They understand why
the tortoise won the race; they know that “steady wins the race,” and that the
Slight Edge is the optimal rate of growth for them.
Successful people practice the daily disciplines that are assured to take them
to their final destination. They show up consistently with a good attitude over a
long period of time, with faith and a burning desire. They are willing to pay the
price and practice Slight Edge integrity.
Successful people focus on having a positive outlook, but understand that
the funk get’s everyone—and when it comes for them they embrace it, knowing
it is just refining them. They take baby steps out of the funk—and step back
into positivity.
Successful people use inertia to build momentum, making their upward
journey of success easier and easier. They know how to identify habits that don’t
serve them and replace them with those that do. They understand the powers of
reflection, completion and celebration and they harness them constantly, using
their radar for unfinished business to propel them forward rather than being
sucked backward and downward.
Successful people acquire the three kinds of knowledge they need to succeed.
They create an ongoing support system of both book smarts and street smarts,
learning through study and through doing, and they catalyze and accelerate that
knowledge by finding mentors and modeling their successful behavior. They
plan, they do, and then they review, again and again and again.
Successful people are always asking: “Who am I spending time with? Are
they the people who best represent where I want to be headed?” They form
powerful relationships with positive people; they carefully build Mastermind
groups, work with those groups regularly and take them seriously; and they do
not hesitate to disassociate themselves, when necessary, from people who are
consistently negative and threaten to drag them down.
Successful people read at least ten pages of a powerful, life-transforming book
each day, and listen to at least fifteen minutes of educational and inspirational
information every day.

187

188

The Slight Edge

Successful people go to work on their philosophy first, because they know it
is the source of their attitudes, actions, results and the quality of their lives.
They understand that they can increase their success by doubling their rate
of failure.
They understand activity and because they do the thing, they have the power.
They understand the power of simple things.
They understand the power of daily disciplines.
They understand the power of the water hyacinth, and know how to use it.
They know how to keep paddling when others give up and sink.
They know when they are being offered the choice of wisdom.
Successful people understand the Slight Edge, and they put it to work
for them.
So ... where do you go from here? Find your penny—then start doubling it.

Afterword:
The Slight Edge Next Generation
Individually taking responsibility, collectively changing the world.
by Amber Olson

If there is one thing that is clear about the Slight Edge philosophy, it is this: the
longer you make positive choices every day, the more success will accumulate in front
of you. That is precisely why I love talking about the Slight Edge philosophy with the
Next Generation (which I consider anyone in their teenage years all the way through
their late twenties, because the most abundant resource available to them is time).
Through my parents and others, I have seen the impact of a lifetime full of right
and wrong decisions and where they lead you. I am forever grateful to have had the
Slight Edge philosophy instilled in me at a young age, because I was able to end up on
the positive side of the Slight Edge curve by being aware that the choices I make on a
daily basis matter.
On the other hand, as I approach my first high school reunion, it saddens me to
see where some of my high school acquaintances have ended up. These were people
who had everything in place. They were popular, outgoing, had loving families, yet
somehow never realized that the Slight Edge was working against them. The small
errors in judgment repeated daily over time landed them far from where they wanted
to be.
It is my deepest desire for the Next Generation of Americans to grasp the Slight
Edge philosophy and to become true champions of it in their lives and in the lives of
those around them. I truly believe the only way our country will truly flourish is if
the Next Generation takes responsibility for their lives. Only then can we collectively
change the world.
We see more and more young adults and teenagers contributing to society and
becoming champions for change. Charitable organizations founded by young adults

190

The Slight Edge
are on the rise, as well as the amount of time they are contributing to serve others.
Young adults are now heading up many environmental awareness efforts. I think
it’s safe to say that most of the Next Generation understand the problems that face
our nation more than our politicians do. They know that the status quo isn’t an
option, and that we can’t keep doing what we are doing and expect it to go away.
So how is the Next Generation going to change the world?
Beyond the fabulous humanitarian and charitable efforts they are
contributing, the Next Generation is going to change the

world one individual at a time, one choice at a time,
one day at a time.

They are going to take responsibility for the lives they lead and leave the
blame game to generations past. They are not going to look to the government
to provide for their financial security—they will! They are going to be conscious
about their health and vitality by treating their bodies like the precious gifts they
are. They will value the biggest resource they have—time, and will make correct
daily decisions that will improve every facet of their lives and are the key to longterm gains. How do I know this? Because they are already telling us so!
I have had the pleasure of working with and mentoring many teenagers,
specifically on Slight Edge principles. Every time I facilitate a workshop with
them, they share amazing stories with me that demonstrate their commitment
to help themselves and their communities rise above current circumstances.
They carry a message of hope and determination that is inspiring.The world
they have been handed is not ideal to say the least, but they are making the best
of their situation, and I’m confident that collectively they will move mountains.

Change Through Personal Responsibility
First, I want to paint an accurate picture of the times we find ourselves in,
and then hopefully provide some useful steps that we can all follow to help bring
big change through personal responsibility.
I have chosen to focus mainly on health and finances, as they are both issues
that are at the forefront right now due to the down economy and the exploding
obesity epidemic. These are areas that with some Slight Edge efforts can yield
incredible results.

Afterword

Health Check-in
Consider these sobering statistics:
• The prevalence of obesity has more than doubled in the last 20 years. The
rate of adolescent obesity has tripled from 5% to 17%.
• Obese individuals (BMI 30+) account for 1/3 of the U.S. population.
And overweight individuals (BMI 25-29) account for another 1/3 of
the population.
• Obesity can lead to coronary disease, type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure,
breathing problems, and an increased risk of many degenerative diseases.
• 70% of obese patients have had at least one cardiovascular disease risk
factor due to excess weight.
• Unhealthy weight gain due to poor diet and lack of exercise is responsible
for 300,000 deaths per year.
• The annual cost to society for obesity is $100 billion.
I think we can all agree that the majority of Americans are finally waking
up to the concerns that the rapid rise in obesity is causing, due to the array of
health risks it poses and the deaths related to it each year. So there is a cure: our
daily choices!
Most Americans gain a few pounds a year and rarely notice. Does anyone
else smell the Slight Edge here? But those few pounds a year are what is leading
to the explosion in the growth of obesity, which translates directly to the related
ailments type 2 diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure and arthritis.
James Hill, director of the University of Colorado Center for Human
Nutrition said, “ If we could simply stop the weight gain, the public health
impact we would see would be enormous.”
The size of portions has greatly increased from 20 years ago. Take a look at
the diagram of calories for 2 slices of pizza.

20 years ago
500 calories

Today

850 calories

191

192

The Slight Edge
That is an increase of 350 calories from 20 years ago. If you eat that extra 350
calories just two times a month, that would put on two extra pounds a year, or 40
pounds in the next two decades. And what if you are eating that extra 350 calories
two times a month—where is that getting you? If you were to intake those 350
extra calories twice a week, that is 1,500 extra calories a month, which may not
seem like much. But the compound effect of those extra calories over a year or
years equates to many extra pounds. If that is not the Slight Edge working against
you, I don’t know what is.
Our portions are growing and growing, and we have rapidly become, pardon
the pun, a “Biggie Size” nation. Meanwhile our daily activity is decreasing as we
become more and more of a sedentary society. In fact, a very small percentage of
the U.S. population have physically active occupations. And to make it worse,
most are content to sit in front of the TV. Studies show the typical American
spends 30 hours a week in front of the TV, yet only 27% of American get the
recommended amount of weekly exercise. It seems we have some hours we can
take from TV watching to re-invest in our health.
If we could dedicate 30 minutes a day to physical activity, we would see vast
health benefits that no TV program can provide for us.
With just 30 minutes of physical activity a day you can:
• Reduce health risks (high blood pressure, stroke, osteoporosis, coronary
disease, type 2 diabetes, certain cancers)
• Keep off excess weight
• Ward of viral illnesses
• Help keep your arteries clear
• Strengthen your heart
Research by Gallup Management concludes that “People who exercise at
least two days a week are happier and have significantly less stress. In addition,
these benefits increase with more frequent exercise. We found that each additional
day of working out increased energy levels.”
Wow! Can you see what big benefits are in store for you when you combine
daily actions with a little discipline? Just start somewhere. It can be as easy as
running a lap around your block. But if you don’t start somewhere you will never
attain your health goals.
Take the example of Jereme, 21, who discovered how small actions that
compound over time make a difference. She has a passion for the sport of
gymnastics. But the older she got, the more competitive the sport got.

Afterword
Through the sport of gymnastics I have learned time management,
self-discipline, teamwork, and most importantly the power of one’s mind.
Gymnastics is a sport where progress is slow, skills are perfected
through muscle memory, patience, and hard work. It is a very strenuous
sport, both physically and mentally, and takes years of a solid foundation
to build off of and improve. I did not have a solid foundation when I started
competitive gymnastics at age seven. I had moved gyms two years after I
started the sport and when I made the transition to the new gym, I basically
had to learn the sport all over again. Through patience, hard work, and
many hours at practice I became one the top ranked gymnasts in California.
By age 12 I was practicing twenty five hours a week, and commuting two
hours a day. There were days when my body hurt, when I had homework to
do, when I thought I could not handle doing another routine at practice,
when my mind and body wanted to throw in the towel and give. But I
didn’t. I learned through thirteen years of competitive gymnastics that
there are going to be rough days, there are going to be days when you have
given your full effort and you still come up short, there are going to be
days that you want to forget. But in reality those are the days that make
you stronger, that make you realize anything is possible with effort and a
positive attitude. I learned at a very young age that your mind can control
your body in positive and negative ways. Your thoughts are so powerful that
they can pull you out of a rut or keep you buried deep within. Gymnastics is
all about seeing and believing the positive. If you cannot see yourself succeed
and improve, than there is no way that you will. Gymnastics has taught me
that you cannot go through the motions, you cannot mark your skills. This
concept can be brought over to daily activities in life. If you go through the
motions of life without being conscience, without being purposeful, then it
is a danger to you and others.
Small steps can make a huge difference, and with a strong support
system, such as my teammates and family, good role models, and strong
work ethic, barriers can be broken and huge accomplishments achieved.
Jereme is attending Oregon State University and was a part of the Oregon
State Gymnastics Team for two years before a career ending injury forced her to
retire from the sport. She continues to impart her wisdom to younger gymnasts,
however, as a team coach at a private gym. Some of her students have competed at
top state levels while simultaneously cultivating the same valuable life disciplines
that Jereme first honed within gymnastics herself.

193

194

The Slight Edge
Great job, Jereme! Small actions compound over time. That means they
grow in size and impact and lead to much bigger things. This is one of the most
important lessons of the Slight Edge.
I had a friend who was trying to lose weight and loved the popular show The
Biggest Loser. She got many great diet and exercise tips from the program. One
day while she was watching she asked herself, Why don’t I jump on the elliptical
machine while I watch this program? That way, after an hour goes by, I’m able to
watch the show as well as get my daily exercise in.
What a great way to customize her daily activity! Do what consistently
works for you, but do something each day!
Believe it or not, maintaining vibrant health doesn’t have to be complicated.
Fad diets will always come and go. But at the end of the day it always comes down
to your daily decisions.

Next Generation Health Plan
Here are some tips for optimal health:
• Be mindful of controlling your food portions.
• Eat slowly, paying attention to when you are full.
• Make good daily food selections (limit fatty foods and carbs, increase
vegetables, healthy grains and lean proteins).
• Commit to 30 minutes of daily activity.
• Take daily vitamins to supplement your diet.

Financial Check-in
Let’s start this section off with some more stunning statistics:
• Average household credit card debt is close to $16,000.
• Total bankruptcy filings in 2009 were 1.4 million.
• Total U.S. consumer debt is $242 trillion.
• 36% of people polled didn’t know the interest rate on their credit card.
• Over a lifetime the average American pays over $600,000 in interest.
• 43% of American workers have less than $10,000 in savings.
• Only 16% of Americans feel confident in their ability to save enough for a
comfortable retirement.

Afterword
As our country deals with its own $13 trillion national debt and a shrinking
Social Security system that is going bankrupt, it’s pretty clear my generation will
have no other choice but to take responsibility for our own savings and retirement
plans. The good news is with proper planning rooted in the Slight Edge philosophy,
we can rest assured we have everything we need to live out our golden years.
When it comes to finance you always want the Slight Edge of interest
working for you not against you. If you understand the value of time and the
amazing principle of compounding interest, then you know that consistently
saving a little, especially at a young age, can help you amass a small fortune for
your retirement.
For example, a 24-year-old invests $2,000 a year for six years. If left
untouched in an interest-accumulating account, that $12,000 investment will be
worth over a million dollars by age 65. That is an example of what we call the
Slight Edge working for you. Unfortunately, interest can also have an opposite
effect. This is how the Slight Edge can work against you. Say at age 24, instead
of investing $2,000 a year for six years you purchased $2,000 worth of items on a
credit card that you were not able to pay off at the end of the month. A latte here
a DVD there, doesn’t seem like much at the time of purchase, but when using a
credit card to buy these items it can have a painful effect for years to come.
Let me show you.
If you added $2,000 worth of debt to your credit cards each year for six years
and were never able to pay them down, that same interest that was working for you
in the first example to become a millionaire is now working against you as your
credit card debt accumulates compounding interest. That overspending of a few
thousand dollars for a few years will be over $1 million in debt by the age of 65.
This is an extreme example, but I think you get the point. You have a
choice with every dollar you earn. Are you going to put it somewhere where
interest is working for you or against you? It’s a Slight Edge decision you face
every day.
Just for fun, let’s break that $2,000 a year into a daily amount, since we are
talking about daily disciplines here. That $2,000 a year is approximately $5.50 a
day. I can easily save $5.50 a day, but the problem is it’s just as easy not to save
$5.50 a day because we don’t recognize in that daily decision how much of our
future financial security is resting on that $5.50 a day. I could easily spend this
amount on a magazine, a large latte, a smoothie, etc. But knowing the Slight Edge
like I do, I would know that saving $5.50 a day is going to get me to my $2,000 a
year, which is eventually going to make me a millionaire at retirement.

195

196

The Slight Edge
I also know that putting $5.50 a day on a credit card I am not fully paying off
will get me to my $2,000 a year of interest-bearing debt that is eventually going
to sink me.
This is the reason so many Americans are swimming in credit card debt and
facing bankruptcy. Not because of one bad financial decision, but because of
several daily $5.50 bad decisions that have snuck up on them before they could
even see what hit them.
So what is worth more to you, your $5.50 a day in magazines, lattes or
video games, or knowing you are creating financial security for years to come?
The choice is always yours, and you are always making it, so you better be
aware of it.
I think People magazine put it best when they said, “A latte spurned is a
fortune earned.” I encourage you to figure out what financial guru David Bach
calls your Latte Factor—what you are spending money on daily that isn’t
completely necessary. Know that the instant gratification of your purchase isn’t
worth the agony and frustration the compounded effect of these decisions will
be. The Slight Edge decision to save that money and let the interest work for you
will reap huge benefits for years to come. Invest a latte a day in your life and you
will greatly rewarded.

Financial Tips for the Next Generation
• Determine your “Latte Factor” and make daily savings goals. Invest that
money in a high-interest savings account or CD.
• Don’t spend more money than you can pay off each month on your
credit cards.
• Make sure you have the most competitive interest rates on your credit
card. Be aware if you miss or are late on one credit card payment, your
interest rate can greatly increase, sometimes even double.
• Meet with a financial mentor to determine the best way to save for college
and retirement, and trace that back to daily goals.
Health and finances are just two main areas you can see the Slight Edge play
itself out.
The main point I am trying to make is that the Next Generation has to be
responsible for the outcome of their lives. Commit to being responsible for the
trajectory of your health and finances. Commit to being responsible for you’re
your contribution to society. Ask yourself, “How do I contribute to preserving

Afterword
the earth’s resources? How should I best give of my talents and time to help my
community and help those in need?” Commit to being responsible for your
education and career development. Teachers and parents are not ultimately who
will decide if you reach your aspirations or attain your dream jobs—you will be!
Read how Slight Edge reader Alex Cross took responsibility for his
own development.
I was having a hard time staying focused in my studies and was
struggling to keep up. I was failing in half the classes I was taking and was
slowly adopting a bad attitude toward school in general. At the urging of
my dad I started to read at least 10 pages of a good book a day. I started
with SUCCESS for Teens: Real Teens Talk About Using the Slight
Edge. I started implementing daily study habits into my schedule and took
small steps to improve my academic success.
My grades improved to the rank of AB honor roll. At the end of the
school year I received an award for “most improved student.” The next
year I continued the regimen of ten pages a night. That year I received a
letter of commendation from President Obama for scholastic achievement
and have been on AB honor roll ever since. I even recently received a
commendation from Duke University for testing in the top 5% in the nation
in a standardized test.
No matter where are in life, high school, college, our first job, or building our
careers we can all learn a lesson from Alex and commit to being the driver of our
own development and our ultimate destiny.
There are numerous other areas of our lives where the daily decisions we
make either move us closer or further away from our goals. What else is important
to you? What else pulls at your heart? If it is environmental consciousness, trace
back your carbon footprint on the earth to daily activities. If it is excellence in a
sport, trace back the success in that sport to your daily activities. If it is academic
excellence, trace back your end goal to your daily activities. The important part
is to stay committed to what is important to you and stay committed every day.
In a society that has a lack of commitment, we change channels, cell phones,
jobs, even significant others at an alarming rate. Wouldn’t it be refreshing if a
generation was so sure of what they wanted and so committed to their cause they
practiced unshakable commitment? I desire from the bottom of my heart to see
this happen and I hope you will join me in living that out.
I believe the future is truly your canvas, where every possibility is available
to you if you will only harness everything you need to make your goals and

197

198

The Slight Edge
aspirations a reality. Be a generation of change. Be a generation of responsibility.
Be a generation of discipline. Be a generation of commitment. Be a generation of
the Slight Edge.
If you are a part of the Next Generation, I hope you choose the life of your
dreams every day. If you are the parent, grandparent, uncle, aunt or teacher of
the Next Generation, I hope you will help support and spread the Slight Edge
Next Generation message.
Visit slightedge.org to learn more about how you can get involved in
advancing the Slight Edge Next Generation message, as well as view additional
resources and join a community of people dedicated to the Next Generation.

A Special Invitation

Be the change you wish to see in the world.
— Gandhi

We talked about the ripple effect earlier in the book. The ripple effect is so
much bigger than the individual ripples we create. The magic lies in the collective
ripple we make together in our community, our nation and the world.
We have created an online Slight Edge community to help you start your own
positive ripples. The community was designed with you in mind—combining
all of the best Slight Edge principles. You will have access to life-enhancing
information and resources to help you stay on track with your daily habits.
You will also experience the power of associations by being a part of a positive
community with like-minded individuals. You will be able to interact and touch
the lives of others as well as share your own Slight Edge story.
The Slight Edge could end here for you and you can move on with the rest
of your life. Or you can be a part of a movement—a movement of things that are
easy to do, easy not to do, yet make all the difference in the world.
This is a Slight Edge decision and I hope you make the right one!
It is my deepest desire that you leave a legacy of positive ripples.
Sincerely,
Jeff Olson
To join the Slight Edge community visit www.SlightEdge.org. You can also
follow us on Facebook and Twitter. I look forward to seeing you there!

www.facebook.com/yourslightedge

www.twitter.com/yourslightedge

Life-Transforming Resources

The Happiness Advantage, Shawn Achor
As a Man Thinketh, James Allen
Multiple Streams of Income, Robert G. Allen
Smart Women Finish Rich, David Bach
The Automatic Millionaire, David Bach
Start Late, Finish Rich, David Bach
Start Over, Finish Rich, David Bach
Debt Free For Life, David Bach
The One Minute Manager, Ken Blanchard and Spencer Johnson
Mach II with Your Hair on Fire, Richard B. Brooke
The Aladdin Factor, Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen
Dare to Win, Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen
How to Win Friends and Influence People, Dale Carnegie
Acres of Diamonds, Russell H. Conwell
The Richest Man in Babylon, George S. Clason
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen R. Covey
The 8th Habit: From Effectiveness to Greatness, Stephen R. Covey
Outliers, Malcolm Gladwell
The Compound Effect, Darren Hardy
Delivering Happiness, Tony Hsieh
Think and Grow Rich, Napoleon Hill
Delivering Happiness, Tony Hsieh
Rich Dad Poor Dad, Robert T. Kiyosaki and Sharon L. Lechter

Cashflow Quadrant: Rich Dad’s Guide to Financial Freedom, Robert T. Kiyosaki
and Sharon L. Lechter
Conversations with Millionaires, Mike Litman, Jason Oman, et al.
The Greatest Salesman in the World, Og Mandino
The 21 Irrefutable Laws of Leadership, John C. Maxwell
Failing Forward, John C. Maxwell
The Power of Positive Thinking, Norman Vincent Peale
You Can If You Think You Can, Dr. Norman Vincent Peale
You Were Born Rich, Bob Proctor
Leadership Secrets of Attila the Hun, Wess Roberts
Cultivating an Unshakable Character, Jim Rohn
Seven Strategies for Wealth and Happiness, Jim Rohn
The Art of Exceptional Living, Jim Rohn
The Challenge to Succeed, Jim Rohn
The Five Major Pieces to the Life Puzzle, Jim Rohn
The Seasons of Life, Jim Rohn
The Happiness Project, Gretchen Rubin
True Leadership, Jan Ruhe, Art Burleigh, et al.
The Magic of Thinking Big, David Schwartz
Little Things Matter, Todd Smith
The Millionaire Next Door, Thomas J. Stanley and William D. Danko
21 Success Secrets of Self-Made Millionaires, Brian Tracy
The Science of Getting Rich, Wallace D. Wattles
All You Can Is All You Can Do, But All You Can Do Is Enough, Art Williams
Breaking the Rules, Kurt Wright
SUCCESS magazine
SUCCESS.com
SUCCESS for Teens, by the Editors of the SUCCESS Foundation

Visit www.SUCCESS.com to purchase many of these books and audio and
digital download resources.

About the Author

JEFF OLSON has spoken to more than a
thousand audiences throughout the United States
and around the world. Over the past twenty years,
he has helped hundreds of thousands of individuals
achieve better levels of financial freedom and
personal excellence.
Born and raised in Albuquerque, New Mexico,
Jeff earned his undergraduate degree in marketing
from the University of New Mexico, graduating at
the top of his class. While in graduate school, he
was hired by the Albuquerque Airport as one of the youngest airport managers in the
industry. He then went to work for Texas Instruments (TI), where he worked his way
through its sales ranks to become an intelligence systems manager in less than five
years. He left TI to form Sun Aire of America, a company devoted to all aspects of
solar energy, from design and manufacturing to marketing and distribution. Through
all of this Jeff acquired exhaustive “street smarts” and formal business training in
every aspect of sales, marketing and distribution, and within four years Sun Aire was
one of the largest solar companies in the United States.
Since his experiences with TI and Sun Aire, Jeff has worked with a series of
sales, marketing and distribution companies, building three different sales and
distribution forces from scratch to multimillion-dollar organizations, one of which he
was appointed CEO of. In the early ’90s, he put in place a national satellite-training
program for an independent sales force by placing 30,000 individual satellite dishes
in homes across the country. Based on that experience, he went on to found TPN, The
People’s Network, a company that became one of the largest personal-development
training companies in the nation. As the CEO of TPN Jeff was considered a thought-

leader on the future of personal development, discussing the topic with the likes of
Oprah, CEO of Simon & Schuster Dick Snyder, legendary producer Jimmy Bowen
and many others.
Jeff has worked with such New York Times best-selling authors and legendary
figures of personal development as Tony Alessandra, Les Brown, Nido Qubein, Jim
Rohn, Brian Tracy and many others, producing more than 900 television programs
with them and presenting seminars in every major city in the United States. He has
been featured on the cover of The Wall Street Journal as well as other publications,
including Entrepreneur and SUCCESS magazine.
Jeff contributed the Slight Edge principles to partner with the SUCCESS
Foundation to create the book SUCCESS for Teens: Real Teens Discuss Living the
Slight Edge, which has been distributed to almost two million teenagers.
Jeff describes himself as “a perpetual student of personal development,” and he is
as devoted to health and fitness as he is to personal and financial success. Jeff currently
divides his time between his homes in Dallas, Texas, and Fort Lauderdale, Florida.

®

“This fast-moving book teaches you one of the most powerful, practical and
important success principles ever discovered. It can change your life!”
—Brian Tracy, author of The Way to Wealth

Our favorite endorsements are from our readers!
“I have read personal development books for over 20 years, and I can say this is
the one that tied them all together. The book is so easy to read and understand and
so powerful in its simplicity.”
—Mike Bishop, Wilsonville, OR

The Slight Edge is a way of thinking, a way of processing
information that enables you to make the daily choices
that will lead you to the success you desire.

www.SUCCESS.com

www.SlightEdge.org

Jeff Olson

Jeff Olson has built several multimillion-dollar sales and
marketing organizations, hosted seminars in every major
city in the United States, and produced more than 900
television programs centered on personal development.
Over the past twenty years, Jeff has helped hundreds
of thousands of individuals achieve better levels of
financial freedom and personal excellence.

The

Slight
Turning Simple Disciplines
Into Massive Success

Turning Simple Disciplines
Into Massive Success

“Success is achieved through inches of progress, not miles. Jeff Olson outlines the
philosophies that will give you The Slight Edge in life.”
—Darren Hardy, publisher of SUCCESS magazine and best-selling author of
The Compound Effect and Living Your Best Year Ever

Edge

“Success in life comes one day at a time and, as Jeff Olson suggests, one step at a
time. The Slight Edge will show you how your daily decisions can be the ultimate
key to your success.”
—Ken Blanchard, co-author of The One Minute Manager® and Lead with LUV

The Slight

“The Slight Edge makes you aware of the unwritten rules that we all live by and
just weren’t aware of. Jeff explains these principles in an easy-to-understand
manner that will have you re-evaluating those ‘insignificant’ decisions you make
every day.”
—John C. Maxwell, Founder of The John Maxwell Company and best-selling
author of The 21 Irrefutable Laws of Leadership

Jeff Olson
Revised Edition



======================================================================
FILE: Ogilvy_on_Advertising.txt
======================================================================

· Ogilvy

on
Advertising
David Ogilvy

Vintage Books
A Division of Random House
New York

First Vintage Books Edition, March 1985
Text copyright © 1983 by Dav id Ogil vy
Compilation copyright © 1983 by Multimedia Books Ltd.
(Now Prion Books Ltd.)
All rights reserved under International and
Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Random House.
Inc., New York. Originally publi shed in the United
Kingdom by Pan Books Ltd. and Orbis Publishing Ltd.
and in the United States by Crown Publishers. Inc. ,
in 1983 .
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Ogilvy. David. 1911Ogilvy on advertising.
Bibliography: p.
Includes index.
J. Advertising. I. Title.
[HF5823 .36 1985] 659.1 84-40525
ISBN 0-394-72903-X (phk.)
Manufactured in Singapore
B9876

1

Overture
'Let us march against Philip'

do not regard advertising as entertainment or an art form, but as a
medium of information. When I write an advertisement, I don't
want you to tell me that you find it 'creative: I want you to find it so
interesting that you buy the product. When Aeschines spoke, they said,
'How well he speaks: But when Demosthenes spoke, they said, 'Let us
march against Philip:
In my Corifessions ofan Advertising Man, published in 1963, I told the
story of how Ogilvy & Mather came into existence, and set forth the
principles on which our early success had been based. What was then
little more than a creative boutique in New York has since become one of
the four biggest advertising agencies in the world, With 140 offices in 40
countries. Our principles seem to work.
But I am now so old that a French magazine lists me as the only
survivor among a group of men who, they aver, contributed to the
Industrial Revolution - alongside Adam Smith, Edison, Karl Marx,
Rockefeller, Ford and Keynes. Does old age disqualifY me from writing
about advertising in today's world? Or could it be that perspective helps
a m::ln to separate the eternal verities of advertising from its passing
fads?
When I set up shop on Madison Avenue in 1949, I assumed that
advertising would undergo several major changes before I retired. So
far, there has been only one change that can be called major: television
has emerged as the most potent medium for selling most products.
Yes, there have been other changes and I shall describe them, but
their significance has been exaggerated by pundits in search of trendy
labels. For example, the concept of brand images, which I popularized
in 1953, was not really new; Claude Hopkins had described it 20 years
before. The so-called Creative Revolution, usually ascribed to Bill
Bernbach and myself in the fifties, could equally well have been ascribed
to N.W. Ayer and Young & Rubicam in the thirties.
Meanwhile, most of the advertising techniques which worked
when I wrote Confessions of an Advertising Man still work today.
Consumers still buy products whose advertising promises them value
for money, beauty, nutrition, relieffrom suffering, social status and so on.
Allover the world.
In saying this, I run the risk of being denounced by the idiots who
hold that any advertising technique which has been in use for more than
two years is ipso facto obsolete. They excoriate slice-of-life commercia,ls,
demonstrations and talking heads, turning a blind eye to the fact· that
these techniques still make the cash register ring. If they have read
Horace, they will say that I am dijJiciLis, queruLus, laudator temporis actio Se

I

'I run the risk of being
denounced by the idiots who
hold that any advertising
technique which ·has been in
use for more than two years is
ipso facto obsolete;

UG1LVY ON ａｄｖｅｬｮｊｾｎｇ＠

'I hate rules'

puero, castigator, cerlSorque mirwrum. * So what? There have always been
noisy lunatics on the fringes of the ｡､ｶｾｲｴｩｳｮ＠
bu.siness. Their
stock-in-trade includes ethnic humor, eccentnc art directIOn, contempt
for research, and their self-proclaimed genius. They are seldom found
out, because they gravitate to the kind of clients who, bamboozled by
their rhetoric do not hold them responsible for sales results. Their
campaigns ｦｩｾ､＠
favor at cocktail parties in New York, San Francisco
and London but are taken less seriously in Chicago. In the days when I
specialized in posh campaigns for The New Yorker, I was the hero of this
coterie, but when I graduated to advertising in mass media and wrote a
book which extolled the value of research , I became its devil. I comfort
myself with the reflection that I have sold more merchandise than all of
them put together.
I am sometimes attacked for imposing 'rules: Nothing could be
further from the truth. I hate rules. All I do is report on how consumers
react to different stimuli. I may say to a copywriter, 'Research shows
that commercials with celebrities are below average in persuading
people to buy products. Are you sure you want to use a celebrity?' Call
that a rule? Or I may say to an art director, 'Research suggests that if you
set the copy in black type on a white background, more people will read
it than if you set it in white type on a black background: A hint, perhaps,
bu t scarcely a rule.
In 18th-century England, a family of obstetricians built a huge
practice by delivering babies with a lower rate of infant and maternal
mortality than their competitors.They had a secret - and guarded it
jealously, until an inquisitive medical student climbed onto the roof of
their delivering room, looked through the skylight and saw the forceps
they had invented. The secret was out, to the benefit of all obstetricians
and their patients. Today's obstetricians do not keep their discoveries
secret, they publish them. I am grateful to my partners for allowing me
to publish mine. But I should add that the occasional opinions expressed
in this book do not necessarily reflect the collegial opinions of the agency
which employs me.
This is not a book for readers who think they already know all
there is to be known about advertising. It is for young hopefuls - and
veterans who are still in search of ways to improve their batting average
at the cash register.
I write only about aspects of advertising I know from my own
experience. That is why this book contains nothing about media, cable
television or advertising inJ apan.
If you think it is a lousy book, you should have seen it before my
partnerJoel Raphaelson did his best to de-louse it. Blessyou,JoeL.

2

How to produce
advertising that sells

P

retend you started work this morning in my agency, and that you
have dropped by my of lice to ask for advice. I will start with some
generalities about how to go about your work. In later chapters 1 will
give you more specific advice on producing advertisements for
magazines, newspapers, television and radio. I ask you to forgive me for
oversimplifying some complicated subjects, and for the dogmatism of
my style - the dogmatism of brevity. We are both in a hurry.
The first thing I have to say is that you may not realize the
magnitude of difference between one advertisement and another. Says
John Caples, the doyen ofdirect response copywriters:
'I have seen one advertisement actually sell not twice as much, not
three times as much, but 19'12 times as much as another. Both
advertisements occupied the same space. Both were run in the
same publication. Both had photographic illustrations. Both had
carefully written copy. The difference was that one used the right
appeal and the other used the wrong appeal.' *
The wrong advertising can actually reduce the sales of a product. 1 am
told that George Hay Brown, at one time head of marketing research at
Ford, inserted advertisements in every other copy of the Reader's Digest.
At the end of the year, the people who had not been. exposed to the
advertising had bought more Fords than those who had.
In another survey it was f(mnd that consumption of a certain
brand of beer was lower among people who remembered its advertising
than those who did not. The brewer had spent millions of dollars on
advertising which un-sold his beer.
1 sometimes wonder if there is a tacit conspiracy among clients,
media and agencies to avoid putting advertising to such acid tests.
Everyone involved has a vested interest in prolonging the myth that all
advertising increases sales to some degree. I t doesn't.
*Jested Advertiling Aletlwr/s byJohn Caples. Prentice-Hall, 1975

9

"At 60 miles an hour the loudest noise in this
new Rolls-Royce comes from the electric clock"
Whal makes RolJs.Royce {he best car in the uurld? "T hL'TCis really 110 magic abom it ;1 IS ｭｾＬＮ､ＩＧ＠
pmienr ,menrion 10 dewil," $(1)'5 an eminem Rol/s·RO)..::e engineer.
I. ",\ , H:J mi]C"S an Io,n" the loudest
lrom tI,.. dt"C"" cI .... l;
«'I""" the T",-hn ... ｾＱ＠ lduor "I lull

II",·" }Cars. \\ 'til. a new nct\\ ... k of
d.·.,k" dnd l""tsdel"lI> fmm ("w;,:

00l<.(' <.mnt'S

ｾＧｯ

Ｇ ｯｾＬ＠

J ｨ ｾ＠

ｭＢｾｬＧｯ＠

r"'luct>C,('<, .KOU>uC;]Ii.".
2. L,w, R"II.ltJ,<:c c"sin,- i. r lln for
..,""" !o,,"1'\ ｾｬ＠ ｦｵｬｨｮＬＢＱｾ＠
bdo{c ""
SUIiJlil>".

""J e.loCh "u I> tt'>f-dm'cfl

for hu"drtcds of nule. <)H', ,-at)'''!;

{Oxl<l."rfxes.
3. ｔｨ ｾ＠ 110115 n" )'"e ;5 ､ｾ ＡｩｪＮＺＬ Ｌ｣､＠ ｾＬ＠
Un
Ol< '" e,.J""f" CJ._lt i, ｴＧ Ｌ ｾｨｬ･Ｇ＼ＺＢ＠
ind, es
silo"er rh "n .he ｉｾｲｧＮＢ
Ｌ＠ dum"I!', u ",

4. I he '',If h.ls ｉｾＢＬ｣ｲ＠
ＢＧ ｾＧｦ［ｮＮ＠
br"hs _.ntl .nttumJt,c ｾＬﾷｨｦｴＮ＠
" ¥1} cas, ,., dnw and 10 ｪｾＢｬＮ＠

1....lI er
II i.
No

.h.Lulfeu/ ''''lULl''!.
ｾＮ＠

I he f,n"h.,J CJI sl>C'HJ, ｾ＠ ｜ＮＬ
ｾ＠ ill
f,n"1 1('>1 ,h"I" ｉｾＢｮｧ＠
hne tun,·A
II" '''hJ<'C'tN 1<1 Ｙｾ＠ ＢｬＧｦＮｉｾ＠
or·
.!cal.. I "" t"''''l'lc, ｉｨｾ＠
ｾｮｉＧ［Ｂｴ＼ＺＬＮ＠
u>C
• stc,hoSl"Oj'f"") ｨＢｾｮ＠
for Jxk ＢｬｊｮｾＮ＠
ｴｨ ｾ＠
Ｑｾｬ･＠

(j. Th\ 11,,11. Ro,ce i. ｾﾷＧｷＬｮｴＮ､＠

1<1 Coa;,:. sen'/CC "

lIlnCnul '>nond

for

nO I'",hl"m.

7. Tl." Rolk R")c,, T,,<ii.n..,.. h.t> nt""<'1
｣ｨｊＢｾＬ＠

e" .... p' ,1.", II Ilt'n $" Il"my
1I00ee died'n 19H Ｌｨｾ＠ mOll<>l:rJ'" HI\
Ｇｕｾ＠
､ＢＬｾ＠
f",m eed '0 l.heL .

8. !"I'i" <"1),IC j,\\"()fk Ii giwn f" ,t ,,-,,liS
ol p'imer I"',m , "",]ltJn<l ",hl.'d k·
l\\'("('n ｾＬｪ＠

real. hcf"", ＢｩＬｾ＠

u xU. 01

lini , hi ng pain l 1," on .

n,'

fl.
ffiO,·i ng a ",ilCh "n ,he >tl'w inf:
culumn. you can adju" ,he ,fwl·k·
ｩＧｯ ｮ ｾ Ｎ＠
absorber> 'w <u" " .. <i ｯＩｮ､

I:!. 1h..·..· dre d,rcc "'I'"or,nc S\',tern'
of 1"'\"'·' brJln. '"'' h)dr.",I ....md
""(' ,".,ham,a). 1).,mJ/o,'" to on" \\ill
ｮＧｾ＠
Ｂｲｾ｜ﾷＮ＠
,he ml,,·,.,.l h" Roll, HoI,..'
i,., n·,} ｳＮｬｦｾ＠ ,',rr .tnd JI§Q J ''('I)'lewl,
It Cfu,,,, ...,.... ＢｾｨＬ＠
at ･ｊｾＡｭ＠
he.
l op '1 .......'1 .. In c,(<X">" 01 100 m,p.h.

,·M.

13. 111(' lkntl,,}' ［ｾ＠ m.lde by I{oll,.
lIo)c(' ｾ＠ «"'.1" fox ,nc radiJlon. In..,.·
are i.l<'n, i,'.,111'IOI0' ca rs. ｭｊｮｯｦＢＬＡｕｾ､＠
It) til<' ...,mt ｣ｮｾｵ
Ｇ ｃＧｴＢｳ＠
111 lhe sa",e
works , P,'op ic II ho feci ｊ ｩ ｦｬｩｾ
｣Ｂｴ＠
,, 1"'\11 ､ｮＧﾷＢＩｾ＠
a nolls Ho)'cc can bu y
" Ikntl'"Y'

..."Ct.. I he Boll! Ro,ec il lo" •• t<.'<l in

10, ,\ picnic 13blc, Ｌ Ｇ｣ ｮｌｾ Ｇ ｦｴｾＱ＠
in I ,e,,,,,h
,,"lnuI, ,I,d", oul from und,.,. ,he
d .. ,h, ,""" lI",re '" in" olll behind ,he
fntnt ,,'>Is.

II . ' ou rn" .1:'" ' m'h ''I''iot.JI ＢＧＮ｜ｬＬｾｳ＠
as an bl'n.""' ,mlf.,.. mal,n.!: ＢＧｊ ､ ｬｊｮｾ＠
.
J di<t,ttng m..,hu,e. > 1><.'<1. h"t ｾｮ､＠
<-old ｜Ｇ｡ｬｾ＠
for "J,hiDg. ｾｮ＠ ..!""me
ra«lf or a ,elephon.,.

,h" .• ci",,,;,,,,,,,»!
pons (of ｬＢＧｾ＠

ＬｾＢ＠

f ... ,i>. pr;nl';r.tl
513,W,i,

II '""" \loulJ ｉＬｾ｣＠
tI,e ｲｾ｜Ｂ､ｩｮＡｯＺ＠
ﾷｲｩｾｮｴＺＮＬ＠
"f o:lm·"'I{" Rolls Ro)'"" ')("
ｾＧＨＢ

ｬｫｮｴｾＢＮ＠
""'e or .dc"l",,,,, II, IIDr of
,h., Ucale,., 1i>l.'<.I un "PI""tlr I"'gt:'.
11,,11, 1\o)(C I", 10 It.,<.l..rdlc. Ph"",

ｩＧｲＢＬ

ｯｴｬｾＮ

Ｇ＠

" I ..d.,51144.

Do your homework
You don't stand a ｴｩｮｫ
ｾ ｲ Ｇ ｳ＠ chance of producing successful advertising
unless you start by domg your homework. I have always found this
extremely tedious, but there is no substitute for it.
First, study the product you are going to advertise. The more you
know about it, the more likely you are to come up with a big idea for
selling it. When I got the Rolls-Royce account, I spent three weeks
reading a bout the car and came across a statement that 'at sixty miles an
hour, the loudest noise comes from the electric clock: This became the
headline, and it was followed by 607 words offactual copy.
Later, when I got the Mercedes account, I sent a team to the
Daimler-Benz headquarters in Stuttgart. They spent three weeks
taping interviews with the engineers. From this came a campaign of
long, factual advertisements which increased Mercedes sales in the
United States from 10,000 cars a year to 40,000.
When I was asked to do the advertising for Good Luck margarine,
I was under the impression that margarine was made from coal. But ten
days' reading enabled me to write a factual advertisement which
worked.
Same thing with Shell gasoline. A briefing from the client revealed
something which came as a surprise to me; that gasoline has several
ingredients, including Platformate, which increases mileage. The

Left Bifore / wrote this - the mostfamous
ofaLL automobile ads - / did nry homework.
It ran only in two newspapers and two
magazines, at a cost of$25,(J(J(). The
joLLowingyear, Ford based their multimiLLion doLLar campaign on the claim that
their car was even quie/Jer than a RoLLs.
Below / resigned the RoLLs-Rqyce account
when ｴｾ＠ sent.five hundred defective cars to
the United States. Twoyears later we took
Mercedes, and sent a team to interview their
engineers in Stuttgart. From this sprang a
campaign oflongfactual advertisements
which increased salesfrom IO,(J(J() cars a
year to 40,(J(J().
Below right When / got a margarine
account, / was under the impression that
margarine was madefrom coal. Ten dqvs
reading the literature taught me otherwise.

o

You give up things when
you buy the Mercedes-Benz 2305. Things like
rattles, rust, and shabby workmanship.

A challenge to women who would
never dream of serving margarine
Lever Brothers defy you to tell the difference between
GOOD LUCK margarine and you -know-wh at

ｌ Ｂｾ＠

"JIO>.on'h....' ...'mboion.r.. u

,'i'.....

_'_'_ .. n" "',ptu""" ...
........
..,.,.p'"

...t__
.. I"....... ,w" .." ...
M.... od ..
ＬＱｬｉｓｾＮｮ｟＠

"""hino.... II.romd." Ihbod)o
k ...Id<d'II.OOO---..... poln'..!
ｾｉｬｫＧＮＬｪ｟＠
.... " ".pound

ｾ［Ｚﾣ＠

1')"0,01,0010''''''''"3";11<... ,,

ｾＺ［ﾣＧＱ＠

.... ,,,,;.....

-...""'.,,,.'"',,
［ＺＧｾＢ＠

..._N""' .... ..-." ... ,......

..... po"" .... C... 'm1"·F"'f"I"

..

... """c_""
. -''''''.", ••.

' ..... ｾﾷＬｮｯｉＮｊ＠

"' ＬＭｾ＠
ｾ

ｾＧＺＮ｢Ｂ＠

｟

ＢＧｬＡＰ

Ｇ ＧＱ

ｓ｡ｬ＼［ｹｯＮＢｾ｟＠

Ｇｾﾷ｟

ＢｾＧ

ＱＬＮＭＺｾＧ［］＠

ｾＢＺＧ［

=;.,:. ';. . . ". . ".""'. . . .

ＮＺＧ［Ｍ

.. , .... ,..... _ " ' ........ _toodJ

(f"""1' .... w<nO' .. «nII)' ....".

Sh'y ... ,""".nlin.... '
F. .. '}'lCS .." ....... ,"' •• _

ｾＮＬＺ［ｲ］ｔＡ＠

...

ＢＧｄ｡ＱｭｊｯＬ
U...... " ..

ｾ

［ＬＺＮＧＡｾ］＠

"''''''';''''''_'_'''C''
...,-' ""
..... ,.., "'.... ,.
""

｛ｾＺＥｦ＠

｜ＧｌｨＮｩＡＱｴｱｵ･ｬＢｉｾｫ｣ｹｯ＠

ｍ｟ＢＵＧｉﾷｾ＠
""y"''''I''''.,.w
...... '''''''
....

'I0,...n

AI .."""""""oci"

\1"'_0"'''''-'''''''_10''''''''

,,..,, "' ..... '''1 ｾ＠ ..,,, '.. " ... " " '"

ＢＮｾ＠

ＢＧｾ｟＠

ｾＡＺ＠

ＮＺｾＡＢＧ＠

That night lI"ega'eallinncrparty.
'\'c: hlled our hole Frenc h crm ks
wHhC , OOD Ll'cK.anc1 prilH('d ｴｨｾｭ＠
...."t.'hcrc.

,··,.. ｜ ﾷＩｾ＠

....I·

..Ｇｾ｟ＷｷＺＩ［Ｎ＠

<""·"I""""''fd",,,,,,,,,"J'''tp .. pp/J

......

ＬＮ｢ｩｴＩｾ

ｾ＠

......... ,"" ....,'"

!>.OC .." .. """' ... ....,_"" ......
_""', .. Ｎ［ｾ＠ ..·""'rol ..... ..
ｾ＠
l""'.iI".

'.,If'&
"""r-' ..
."40_
..............
｟Ｌ

....
ｵｾ＠

After dinnc we kt the cat out of
the bag. Nnbody could ｩｊ｣ｬｾ｜Ｇ･＠
that
,he) had ｾ･｣ｮ＠
ealing mm!!QI/1!(.
l hC) hadbeenta ke nin. cOlnplclely
and al)'>(}lllteh. eter)' man jack of
them. :\n" the)' IQll(d it!
\\'1' ｬｉｾ､｣＠
dght conlcrts to GOO D
L LC K thaLnigh l.
Top Secret Rese o rch
The in,idc ston behind thi s ne,,'
Gooll i .ucKi.ab,olutc11 fascinating.
LeIer ｬｊＧｯｴｨｲｾ＠
set Ollt to producc
amargnr)newhichcouldholt!itsown
Ilitil)"lI·kno"'I,hal, .\margarine
whICh Ihe nu),! s"ohh"h lettlers
II"Qultll>c hal'P} to ""bbk on thl'ir
,]"u"'II<.·t,.Amargarine"hlthwnLLlti
l>c indillingui,hab1c ｾ＠ el'en when
melted fur loh,tet or ｡ｲｵＨｨｯｫｾｳＮ＠
In
sh"n . a ll1bfrma l'gninc.
it too l r"'lTll'Cll){'H,oftopscnet
ｲ｣ｾ｡ｬｨ＠
to do this triLk.
I he a(lnal jliIl'l1l "f GOOD LeCK
\I.t< alhieltd bl a,lal'ling a ｲｾｬｉ｡ｫﾷ＠
ｾｩｊｬ＠
Ll'£],nitlLll' di ,t'oluer! at a fa·
1111)1 " ｾｴ ｡ｴ･ｃｯｬＨＧｧｦ＠
.\ gri("llllre I n
Ihe 1.11"111 bdt .. ｜ｾ＠ ｾ＠ maLIn of 1.1(1.
ＡＩＷＢ
ｾ＠ "f our lIl/iledient< I""'e l'om
,\II1I'I)(all l.lnn', TI1l're" nmhing
ＢＧｩｬｴｨ･ｾ＠
ｾ｢ｯ｜ｬｴ＠
GOOD LLCK.

P05te uri ze dMilk
\\'l'addthnllsan,lsnfgallonsofthc
(,nt'st ,kim '111M to Goon LUC K. We
a],o I'Utall<lllL 1,·,.IlOO IIniLSof \ 'ilamin .\ in el'cr) ｾｯｨｫｮ＠
ｉＢＰｵｮｲＡｾｬｴｩ､＠
is morc th:"j IOU ge l in thin) ｢ｊＮＬ［＾ＡＧｾ＠
nt C,ratic. \ milk. Morc Ihan)uu get
in two LllI/en he,h brrn egg'.
ｬ ｡ＢＬｩｮｾｬｉＧＱ＠
build uplou r
I ｨ ｃｓｬｩ
re,i,l.mcc 10 colds. And if)oll hal'e
children. ollr Ｂｩｴｾｲｮ＠
A will make
ＧＨｾｉｮｭＡｬ･ｲＮ＠

It I' hard to think o[ ｾｮＩ＠
thing)oll
could gill' ｉｨｩｬ
､ｲｾｮ＠
"hi,h 1I'0ul.( tlo
tilem mure good .. \nonling to the
dOl tOT'. GooP L UC K l'rm ｩ､ｾ＠
about
tl'Lle Ihcenerg) of ｢･｣ｨｬｾ
ｫ＠ .

Fo rme rs ' Wiv e s Swil ch

ｾＺＧＬＮ［ＭＢ＠
Ｚ［ＧＮｾ＠

.... ro ..... ,....., . ,._

ｾ＠

ｾＺｩ＠

... "" •••• Ol",.,p""" ..... , ... ,,.
, . ... """ ... ｰＧｾＢ＠

Ｇｉ＠

ｩｲｭｬＧ､Ｂ･ｯＮｴ｡Ｌ｣ＨＩｦｨﾷｾ＠

.....,r', .... ｆ｟ＧｾＢ＠
.......... """
.. Ｂｬｾ＠
... •.. "·..... "'l"' ' ' '·'

""' ..,j...... ..... ..." .. "" .. ,·"""',"'..1_-.-""·,.........,·....
ｾＢＧ＠

Ｇ ＧＢｉ＠

ｩＧＺ Ｚｨ ｾ Ｇ･ｗｾｮｬｉＺ＠

aJl(lt".lI(,d 1'.:rte{\h a"fuL
\ .all ｷ･ｾｫ＠
she ,.ISlc,loLlrne" gaM.
en G OOD I. IT K. 1 <, tdl lOll Llll' IrUlh
shc/wdtolasleit.iJc.al"cweworkfor
LelCt Ilrolhl"1'I and our "·if,, kill"'"
"hi{h,irlelwrbrcad ismargal'incd
Oll . Oufloll>())"(wa' jlllb/H"·!!.'I<Jril.
" H ere." ｾｨｲＵ｡ｩ､Ｎ＠
"is ,omcthing to
bc proud of. I 1I"01lid nCHT hale
lnllwn tk,t It 11'(/\ margarine. This
stutfis III a das, 1" il5c1f. From now
on.an,onewhopa)'scightlcenlla
pOllnd is a dOJM." And so forth. for
halfanhnllr.

..Ｂ Ｂｾ＠

C.,._ _"',y.... "" ... ""'.U

.....

, ... ,fO'I'}#_' ..''"I'·· ..... ' ...

ＧＭ

0.-,...

"1· .....'

1>10".0..·..... _

ob!;l.... __ • p"..o: ", ..

ＢＧｓｯ

__Ｑ＠

ＬＺｾ＠

lIIargarine(llitheirl"blc,tur"IlLhe
tea in China.
We dont hb'lle ｴｨ･ｾ＠
pt'Tsnicket\"
people. not one iJlt. A, a mailer of
(;1((. ollr OlIn \,·ifl· u,ed to he the
same IIal. ller prejudice .'gainsL
ｭｾｲｧＢｩｮ｣＠
dalcd iJa{k 10 hn (htld.
hood. "hen ,I I{' "'asgilcn 01<1·f.11h·

oI'..

Ｎ ｾＱ＠

..... _. _ _

Voo_·, ... E....,.. .. "',.. ... 110••

=-.=-:":'
_..
_ ':0.: :':
_.,...........
_"' ... .....
.

Th('\" ｬｯｫｾｴ＠
I'cry ､ｌｩ｣ｾｊＱｉｯｲ･＠
(hic
than all}LiIingelscon our t:tllie. in·
c1udlllg thc family LOWl'stoft.

\\'1' nnn c"pected to see jl11'mrrs
s"!l.h In margarine. \\'1' Lhought
rhe\' wmild iJe Ihe 13'1 10 sec the
light.
I\lIt till' Lru]. astoni'hing r.let is
Ihi,. in thn.c rnral ｡ｲ･ｾＧ＠
",hcre ｉｾ＠
halcalread)inll'O<.lucetiGoopl lC K
in a quiet "a). thou,amb of ｲ｡ｉｬ
ｃｉＧｾ＠
wi,cs arc now scning ｴｨｩ ｾ＠ new gold·
cn ｾＱｉｲＧ＠
at Cl'cry meal. E\l'o rllflT
husiJantiscan'l tcJl the difference!
Rc1iclc it or nOI. Amnican r.lf,"·
ersare nOw (.':Hing almost as ","o;ch
margarillcascit)fulks.Slm;:'nJsolIls,
those rarml'r.;· "in!s.

So ve SOc 0 Pound
T.1kc our word fur il. GOOD LUCK is
in ｾ＠ ､｡ｾｳ＠
｢ｾ＠
iuelf. ｲ｣ｾｬｉｹ＠
and truly.
One iJlu'.a nd lOll ",mget ol'erYOllr
eX]l'cmile prejudice against ｭｾｲＦ｡ﾷ＠
( \\'e knowa Grcenwieh child ,dlO
<al do,,'" an,1 ｾｴ･＠
a quarter of a
pound n( GOUD LI'C K- JllllIglII.)
Goon LI'CK Will saleynllasllluch
ｾｳ＠
',0 T,,"ts a ]lollml-cnough to give
'FW \OM"EII. suuscriplions to all
ＩｵｲｬｾＧｨﾷｩ･ｮ､ＬＮ＠

In Ihc wonl,ofollf "'ife, don't be
a '[Ul'C-gN GOOD L\:c"

Suddenly DOVE makes
soap old-fashioned!
｜ Ｌｾ

Ｌ＠

I., t!, .",1 ,,,>1 ..

C""iUllI! ;'''U' ,,,,,
",k,k- yoo 1...,1><

I"t'suh iru,:- cillllixlig-ll hd pcd to rt'w'l"Sr a ｾｶ ｣ｮ ＭＩ ｜ Ｇ［ ｉ Ｇ＠ d{'cline in SIII'II's
Sh,IIT-of-lllilrh,t.
If \O Ll .111' 100 I.l.l\ to do ｴ ｨ ｩｾ＠ kind or hOIll{'work. you may
oc('.'l:.iotl;llv Ｑｋｾ＠
into ,I sU;TNsful ca rl1II<'1ign. but you will run tltl' risk or
skiclding- ｡ｬｾＩｴｲ＠
U II \\ h,l t 111 \ I)roth{'r Fra ncis I 'all l '( [ ' t II{' slippery surf-'we
ｯｲｩｮ､ｴＧ｜
ｾ ｜ｬｴ＠
bril li,lIwt,:
\ 0 \1 1' llext c ho re is 10 find OUI \\'h.lI kind oj" a(hT'r tising: yo ur
compet itors han' hl·t'll doi ng ror simi1.lr p roducts, ami with wha t
ｳ ｵ ｣ｾ
Ｌ ｾ Ｎ＠ This will giv(' )OU your ｢｣ＧｬｩｾＮＢ＠
.
Now comes f( 's('arch among (1 )lISU IllCrs . I' uld Olll how IIICY.II\ulk
about you r kind ofprod ll('t. \\ hat ｝［Ｑｬｾ
ｬｉ｡ ｧ ･＠ thl')' uSt when 1IIl) '.cilSl:uSS
til(' s ubj(,(·t. what a tt ri bu tes are important to tiWII I, (ll/d u·hal prall/1M would

IN " utff liM!;' 10 maM till'//! hUllymrhranJ!.
If you {'annOl alRlrd thc '!'I"\ices or ｰｭｴ
ｩＬｾｏｬ
ｬ｡ｳ＠
10 do this
IT'Sl'l1rdl, do it yourst"lJ: In/iJflnal COllvcrsatiollS wit ll halr-a--<loze-1\
hOi IS/..'wives ('an sornetimes Iwlp a cop\'writ{'l' mort' tha n lormal sun:eys
in wllit'h hedol.'S IlOt partici pate.
Above 1/llJJilllmtd /)i1''I'asa 1m/II barfilr
l(ulllfII 'l'ilh d/)' ｳ ｾｭＮ＠
1IIlilllSd II !,roll/Hi
Idlldr h(1(1 l('QII III In/ : ' f)I.!<'!' Cfflllmymf
,J.wll'hilf)'QI./ bal/It.'

Positioning
.'\mv cou.sider how you WillH to 'positioll' your product. This curio tls
verh is in g r('at fa\'or a mong marketing CXIX'fts. but no t\\U or t1wm
agrft' wha t il mean:.. :\ 1) own d efillitio n is '\\hat lll(' p roduct d oes, a nd
w ho it is ror: I could haw positioned fu'e a..., a ､ｬ Ｇ ｴｬ Ｇ ｉ ｾ ｻＧｮｴ＠
ba r fo r men
with d irty hands, hu t chose instl':!d to IXlSiLi!)!! it as a Loilet bar for
wornc!! wit ll dry skit l. This is still w()rking 2,'l y.·ars 1:I\cr.
In NOr\\'a h tire SAA B car had 110 me.burahk prollle. Wepositio llt'd it as a (';Ir ror u7l1ter. T hr{'(' ytar.. bter it \\ .tS voted ti l{' btJI car
ror ｎｯｲｷｱｾ
ｬ｡ｮ＠
winters.
To advertise a car lhat looke-d like an orthop('(:lic boot \\uu ld have
(icli'; lt('(t Illt'. But 13il1 Ikrnbach a lKl his 1111'1'1) ' mcn fXlsitioncd
Vol kswagcll as '1 prntt'st ｡ｧｩｊｬｾＱ＠
the vu lga rit), Or O('lroit cars ill those
days, thtTeby makillg the Bet,tk a cult a mong those Amt'ncans \\'ho
('S('h('\\ conspiclI()us t'f)nSlimpt ion.

Right Nolin! 70U'/I.If7l1f.llli'«Cfll!nr hNid

()j, II'iJ . (l5k/d /w III r/u 1m am'l'rlLfllJ,;';.
111/1'I/ (oIIjlilf 11 ;111 (II/(J/hrrc/unljvrml In(
/(1 'dUSt. ｊｾ

Ｏｦ＠

Oil/I( IJrmha£ha((!lfdoll"
oJ lht 1TW.,/ !}(!<j·, ,/lIl mm/kIl!!.'LJ /II lilt
ｨｉｊｬｦｾｯＨＧｙｭｴ

ｩＡＮＧ＠

you try harder.

'I 1'hmY!II 'rtoll/j'

Orclsc.

Sumha 2.}'.1II 10'/wrder. Or flJ( ,' 77li.1
Iliaboll(uljll)JlllOIIlIIg /lUlllt l!!1 III/YmM·

Ji" Nrrlz. u:lw lUll .Vall/lm I.
!)tNIWlltd I illJ..Sllwp,m II') a prolij / IIgmnsl

Ｇ＠ muAIII/; tlU' /Jeffl, (I w/l

fillion,£: Iwn-cIJI!fOmw /.,. 'n it [o/JJ11'f1lrr lnLl

ｾ＠

ｾＮＬ＠

((Irs a 1>'Ilr.

....,

ｾ

ＬＮｾ＠

"

ｾ＠

ＧＢＮｾＬ＠

Ｂ

"" ....... ,...... un..

_-_..,-

ＭＬＮｾ＠

ｾ＠

ＺＧｾＢ＠

ｾ＠ ... .. . . .. .
....'. ................. ....".
--_
..........................'........ _--'"-'..
".... _...."'""","' . .......
ＬＭＢＮｾ＠
'

ｾ＠

ｾ

ｾＭＬ＠

ｯＮｾ＠

ｾ＠

..... . _, ....

... , ,' ,." ........ ''''-''''''''' ...... .........
ＢＧＮｾＬ｟

Ｎ ＬｾＭＮＧ＠

. . . . . . _h. . ---,
......

Ｚ

- ,.""'

Ｌ＠

.•.

.. , ...... _.. __ .. ｾ＠
ｾ＠

.Jllhan Konlll!•. Ihillr' dITtY/or I lrImul
K rrw. Sale:. of/hNdr ami up 105aJ,(XX)

..... ,,,.... ',
_. .,_
.... ...,................
", .. .

_---_.........-......-_....... .. . ....-..

.... ... ＭＮｾ＠
....
. -.-' -. ,,.,., '" .-....
..."' ... .."... ,'-. ....,... ,,..;.. - ...... .,
_'.........
".. ."".---....... -,.
... , "'""_.".,
.....
-._...M_.___....._._
_.... ....
.. .........
ｾ＠ｾ＠

Opposite /Jql lr nil/it Bmdm(/,
ｪＩ ｲｬｭｩＮｫ･ｾ

Avis is only No.2
in rent a cars.
So why gowith li S?

When ),ouh.· onl)' No.2,

ｯＮ｟Ｌ＠

ｾ＠

,

.. . , .. f _

" .......... ",,.. ..... _''', ...., " Ｎｾ＠

I' W" . ,..

•• ,. ,• .,_" ......' ＢＬ .....
Ｂ ｾｨ
ｨＮ＠
_'M,"''' '"'''.
"'--M_',_ ...
_ _ "" ... ,
ｾＬＮＭ

Ｌ ＮＬｾ＠

ｾＬＮ＠

"""',.

<--.,--"',

ｾＬＭ

Ｂｾ

ｾＬ＠

Ｂ

｟ＧＢ＠

Think small.
Our little car isn 't so much of a nov elty
any mOr e.

A coupl e of dozen college kids don't
try to squeez e inside it.

The guyo t th e gas station doesn't ask
where th e gas goes.
Nobody even stares at our shape.
In fact, some people who drive our little

nivv er don't even think 32 miles to the gal Ion is going any great guns.
Or using eve pints of oi l instead of eve

some of our economies, you don' t even
think about them any more.
Except when you squeeze in to a small

quarts.

parking spo t. Or renew your smal l insur-

Or neve r needing anti-freeze.

Or rac king up 40,000 miles on a set of
tires.
That' s because once you get used to

ance. Or pay a small repai r bil l.
Or trade in your old VW fo r a
new one.
Th ink it over.

UYou can see the lemon in Schweppes Bitter Lemon.
That's because Schweppes uses whole, fresh lemons.
Juice, pulp, peel, ｾｲｹｴｨｩｮｧＮＢ＠
So"yo Co mm and., \ Vh ". !> •• d,
p""dcn l of Schw.Pl'u (U&!o) I.., J.
"Schw.I'P'" ,""'Mull B,u•• r....m·
on," heCOnllnut!I. " h 'U, OU 'hffi
ｮｾｷ＠
produCt on on< hund red )"urs,
andwcd,dnotltln' ."
S<h ,,·cppn u..s ｷｨ ｯｬｾ Ｌ＠ fruh lem·
on. ,n nuking II",e, ｉ ｾ ｭ ｯｮＮ＠

1,,".,

,-

pul!"ptel,n<ry,h;ng . T hu,i" '"' '',
g","n-up " "'.
"S<hw<l'P"> B,ttor Lemon '. ,he
ｾｔｊＮｴ＠
!<If, drink," d.da.e, 'he
S<hweppt.m.n, " Ihe only one you
Ｂ Ｇ ｴｨＢＬＧｦｾｬｮｧｫ･ＮＭｲＺ＠

Tltno ••e.tl...t,wo mo.eu!lOS

for Sch weppn Il tterl..o"",n . It IS an

Above An essqy in the art oj
image-building. For 18years 1used thejace
ojmy client Commander Whitehead as the
symbol ojhis own product. It worked to beat
the band on a peppercorn budget.

ｾＺ Ｚ Ｌｾ Ｂ Ｚｾﾷ［ＬＢ

Ｚ ｾＺ［ ＮＬ ＧｾＬ Ｚ＠

Snowm.'I1_bu, Com m,nd. rEJ ...,rd
\VI"'oh •.,d, Amb.>!&ld"r fn,m ,h.
ll ou!><"fSchwcJ'P""S,nLu"d"n.
T h.Command.. will telly"" ,ha,
tiltS w,nte,'. mostfa!olllonabk d nn k "
Vod k,_and.-IOnlt.( AiI ,heragef.... m

""wi,

ｲ＾ｮｯ､｣

Will you love Schweppes in December as YO li did in May?
ｎ

e,",SI ICI< ,..,,") l\ml,h"n o'.'I", I.I.
ｾＬＢＧｷｉｙｭＮｵｨｮ＠
..
V,Mlb .• nJ_-r.,nK ..."h"", ＦａＢｾＬＮ＠
In f)'" h" nd,.dyu rs, MNMI,· h••
f<)l, nd. ",bstltme fo. S<h",crpt. 1>1,.
"1'5".'''' Hnor. AH .. n.,h.,m" kC1
... ry'];",icdnn k( \ 'od b -,nd:I',nlC",
G,n _. nd·T"n,c, Rum_.nJ·T "n,c)

Brand image
You now have to decide what 'image' you want for your brand. Image
means personali!J. Products, like people, have personalities, and they can
make or break them in the market place. The personality of a product is
an amalgam of many things - its name, its packaging, its price, the style
ofits advertising, and, above all, the nature of the product itself
Every advertisement should be thought of as a contribution to the
brand image. It follows that your advertising should consistently project
the same image, year after year. This is difficult to achieve, because there
are always forces at work to change the advertising -like a new agency,
or a new Marketing Director who wants to make his mark.
It pays to give most products an image of quality - a First Class
ticket. This is particularly true of products whose brand-name is visible
to your friends , like beer, cigarettes and automobiles: products you
'wear: If your advertising looks cheap or shoddy, it will rub off on your
product. Who wants to be seen using shoddy products?
Take whiskey. Why do some people chose Jack Daniel's, while
others choose Grand Dad or Taylor? Have they tried all three and
compared the taste? Don't make me laugh. The reality is that these
three brands have different images which appeal to different kinds of
people. It isn't the whiskey they choose, it's the image. The brand image
is 90 per cent of what the distiller has to sell.
Researchers at the Department of Psychology at the University of
California gave distilled water to students. They told some of them that
it was distilled water, and asked them to describe its taste. Most said it

had no taste or allY kind. They told the other students that the disti lled
water c.'une ou t of the tap. Most of them said it lasted honible. T he mere
mention of tap conj ured up an image of chlOli ne.
Give peopl e a tasteorOld Crow, and fell th em it's Olel C row. T hen
give them another taste of O ld Crow, but tell them il'sJack Daniel's. Ask
them ,,,,hich they prefer. T hey'll thi nk the two drinks are quite d ifferent.
Tluyare laslill,!; imagi'S.
I have always been hypnotized by J ack Daniel 's. The label and lhe
ach 'crtising convey an image of homespun honesty, a nclt he high PI;ce
makes me assu me thatJ ack Daniel 's must be superior.
\Vriting advertising for any kind ofliquor is an extremely subtle
art. I once tried usi ng rational facts to mgue the consum er into choosing a
brand of whiskey. I ("didn't work. You don't c3 tch Coca Cola advertising
that Coke contains SO per cent more cola berri es.
)icxt time an apostle of hard-sell questions the im ]X>nance of

- .......... .... - .........
,••.._,.,. ........"" L_ ..
"-' , '
"...
ｾ＠

ｨ

Ｇ ｾＢ＠

,
'

Above J171e/l1'01i C/iOOSf a brand oj
u,hiskry)UU ar; dwosmg aTllmage ../acA

Danit! j adrertlsrml1lts prqjcc( 011 IIIlflgf oj
homtS/nlll hOllff{) alld ｦｨｩＧｲ･ｾｶ＠
/Je/"S/./fUIf'.lUII
IIwlJack DOlliel j is lnJrth its premium

price.
Right Lro Bumtfl j ram/XligllJOI
.\/arlboro /)rojecIJ all imtl,!!.l' which has IIlfItil'
illht bi!!...t;esl-srllmg cigarette In Ihf'worfd.
II hU5 bun nllll/mg. ＨＱＯＰｾＡ＠

. /or25 wars.

wllholtl c/wl/gr .

ｾＺｲ＠

0

I£dI

'' j "
I !ｾＭＮ＠ Ih-i

..: ｾ＠ lt 'ｾ＠

.

ｾ＠

ｾ＠

"s-

'"
ｉＧＮｾＡ＠

ｾ＠

ｾＬ＠

rf

ｾ＠

ｾｉ＠

ｾ＠

n · . '" '__
"!' - ; ｾ［＼ＺＮＢ＠＼ＺｾＢＮＡ
ｾＡ＠ i t ｾ＠ § ｾ＠ ; i ｾ［ＲﾷｱＺ］ｲｴ＠
!:.

ｾ＠

ｾ＠

; Ii

"

3,; ;
ｾＭ
ｾＮ＠
ｾ＠

0"

j ｾ＠

;;> ｾ＠

ｾ＠

ｾ＠
Ｌｾ＠
::"
fI '1

n .<,.

p' ｩＧ｣ｾ＠
ｩｾ＠

,.
" l

0:'

il

.,
'i ｾ＠

"'

'.

ｾｬＭＳＺＱＡＬｉ｜ｏ［

;;' - ii
ｩｾ＠
ｾ＠

ｾ

ＬＺＢ

Ｌ ｾ＠

ｾＭ＾ｅ］Ｌｩ＠
ｴＢ＠

ｆｾ

sc. -

..

ＧＡｩﾷｮｾ［Ｍ

ｾＬＮＳＢ＠

;- =- ""
.

=-

ｾ＠

ＢｊｾＧＮｳ］

i; :;;.ij. ｾ＠

ＺＮｾＡＧｴ＼ｔ＠

ｾｬＺ｝＠

Ｎ､｝Ｂｾ＠

ＧＮｾ＠

•
,r

,,,
ＢｩＭＬｦｾ＠

ｾＴＮＭ

ｾ［ＺＴｯＮ＠

Ｌｾｓ｟ｲＮ＠

.

ｾＢＬＭ

ｾＢ

n

Ｇ Ｇ ﾧＮｾ｡＠

Ｇ Ｎｾ＠

ＢＭｾ

.... -

ｾ＿ＬＢＺｰ＠ - _

Ｚ］ＲＬ＠

｡ＺＡ

｡Ｎｾｦ＠

Ｚｩ ［Ｚ＠

ｾＺ＠

-

;,11-,
ＵｦｾｴＱ

ｾ［＠

ｾ＠

.. d.
ｴ｡Ｎ＠

..
ｾｲＮＭ

ｾＳｬｩｲ＠_ _ ...

ｾＮｳＬｾＢＭ

］Ｚｾｩ＠

.ｾＮＬＧ . ::-i :=
ｾＮ＠
ｬＭｩｾｮ＠

ｾＡＢ｡＠

.;j.=-=

ｾＺ＠

ＢＧＱｬｾ＠

< ... D

ｾ［ＵＭｩ＠
ｾｧ＠

Ｇ Ｎ ｩＬ

Ｓｓ

ｮｾ［＠il:'I"
ＮＺｬ

ｩｬＮｾｓＭ

ＡＮﾷｕｾ＠

ｾ ［＠ ｾ＠ ｾ＠

ｾｗ＠

" <"
::. ｡ＮｾＬ＠

i:

［Ｎｾ＠

ｾＭｩ＠ , ;0 _ ,_

t

; ｾ＠ L:
ｾ＠
tｾ＠ :;;
15 _
ｾ＠

ｾＳ

ｾ ｾ＠

ｾＩ＠

ＢｾＮ＠

ｾ＠

',er
• il- ",:r

ｾ

ｴＢ［ＺｦｾＧ＠

ｆｾ

"_

ＢＧ＠

ｬ ［＠

1.,,"Ef
-'"
ｾＭＲｮ＠

l

ｾ ｧＭ ｾ Ｎ ［＠

E=

Ｚ［Ｍ

ｾ＠

ｾ＠ ｾ＠

ｉｩＢｬＮｴｾ＠

ＢｅｾＺＭ＠

.. ｾ＠

f f5' f

ｈｾ＠

Ｇｾ＠

.i d ｾ＠

"

!5-.ii
ｾ ｾ ｾＬＭ
］Ｍ ｊｩＢ＠
［Ｎｾ｡＠

ｾ＠

t p

ｾＧＺ＾＠

:>

ｾ ｾ＠ ﾷｾｴ＠Ｎｾ＠

S;.

Ｇ［ｴｉｾＱ＠

-'-0,

ｾ［ＺｉＮｲﾷ＠

ｾＭＺＮＢ

｟ ｾ Ｇ ｪｩ］Ｎ＠

Ｍ､ﾷＬ｜ｬｾ＠

Ｌ ＮﾷＧＭｆｩｦ＠

｟ｾＵ＼｜］ｩｬＮＳ＠

Ｕ［ｾｩＢ＠

ｾ＠

:ai- ... ·"

ｩＳ＠

ｾ＼Ｌ＠

ｾＢｅ］Ｕ［ｲﾧ＠

ｾＢＬｴＺＧＭ

［Ｎ＠

ｾｲ

nｾ＠ ｾ＠ ! qｾ Ｍ ｾＮ＠ｾＡＮｩ＠

ｾＢＺ＠

［Ｎ＠

-.
ＺＡＮｾｅ＠

ｾ［ｴＧ＠

ＢＮｾＲｋ＠

Ｚ］Ｍｾ
ｾ［ｲｩｬＮ

Ｎ

.ｾｬｨ＠__ e

ｩｪ｡ｾ｟Ｌ＠

ＢＧｾ＠

ｾ［ＱＢＧＺ＠

ｾＡＺｴ

§- .. I!.!.g

ｾ＠ｾ＠

-

ＺＮＭｧｾＢＧ

ｾ＠

ＢＬＮｾ＠

ＷｋｾＺﾧＢ＠

ＭＳｾＧ＠

ｧＬｾＢｩＭ［＠

i!.

ｾＲＮＢ＠

Ｎ ｾ ｾ
!!-,'"

ＧＺ

Ａｾｧ［ｲ

s··

ｾ ｾｬＧＭﾷ＠

ｾｴＡＮ＠

､］ＭｾＧｴﾷＬＢｩＺｬ［＠

Ｎ［ｾＡ

ｾｲＧ＠ｾ｟Ｍ

ｾＮＱＢＧ＠

Ｚ ＧＢｩｲ

ﾷＢＧｾｬｓＮ

ＡｩｾＭ

Ｍｾ［＠

<:--

ｾＱ｛Ｕｬ＠

..

ｾＧｦＵＭＺＮＡｌｩｴ＼Ｂﾣ＠

- -;':,··e.
. .. ｾ＠

.. ｾ［ＬＮｓ＠
:g"q;.

ｳｾ＠

ｾ［ＺｱＧﾧｊｩｬＬｮ＠ｾＮｪｬ＼･Ｍ｟Ｚ［ｲＡ＠
Ｍ

!.; :- ｾ＠ p

ｾ･［Ｚ｡ＮＳＷ＠

ｾ＠

:>

It I ＡＧＵｾﾷ［ｬＺＭ
- -='B'?t
［Ｍ｡ＮｾＡ＠

ｾ＠ ". ｾ＠ _ {'I'" ＸｾＺＢ［｢＠, , " - = . ｾ＠ ｾ＠ ｾ＠

ｧｾ

Ｇｴｾｲ＠

... ｟＠ ..""'<l
［ｾｳｧｬＺ

Ｚ Ｚ［ｾ

<

p

-

-

ｾ＠

ｾ＠

［｟ｾ＠

［ｲ Ｚｾ］＠

;; ｾ＠ ｾ＠

ｾ＠

• 5"

"-'::;. ｾ＠
ｩ｛

ｾ＠

•; 5
ｾｓＢ＠

t·;:

Sadan fornyer man en klassiker
､ｴＧｳＨｾｉ＠

Dt'll'r t)'wh sidell ｇｲｴ Ｇｬ ｨ ｾﾷ＠ r-.-kyl'r la\'c<le Ｂｂｬｾ｢Ｑ＠
for Dt'n KongC'hge
ｾ

ｾ＠

'-i-

ｐｯｲ

｣ｬＳｩ

ｮ ｳｦＮＬ｢

Ｍ

"k.Oghg' ["
sianen var VI

'

\1

kla ron'r, at her

siod VI o\'l:'rfor
en klassiktr p:i.
linie mcd BorｧｾＧ＠

mobler og PH's lampn.

Mogt'nSl:ns

af Grer/If! M cyt.,r.

TIdt'n har glvt'! os ft' !. GrethI:'
Mq'l'n ｲ･ｮｾ
ＧＬ＠ genncmt:t'nkte form-

Ｂｂｊｾｫ｡ｭ＠

gi\'nmg og ､ｊｾｫｲ＼ＺＢｬ･＠
､ｬﾷ ｫ ｯｲｾ｛ｬ
ｬｩ ｳｫｵｮ｛＠
cr blen'[ lioJ[ pr,tmit-fl'( og ｨｏｊﾫ
ｾｨｫｴＧ
Ｑ＠
i mange lmde,
Ｇ ､ｾＬ＠
og Grl,tht'
Mt'll kullS( cr ｦｯｲｮ＾
Mt')'(T har ne[op fOrllrct "B[iibm's"
tJdlolll- formcr IIwd en glad, rod kam
og t'n lyscrr bundflfvc. tEnd rlllgt'n
l' r lille. men virkningl'll 'tor, og "Rodto p" er Il:t'Hen lige s3 f013kdhg fra

Vi er bare gladl' og stolte owr at
kunile gi\'(" Dem l1lu!ighed("11 for at
va'lge.

sam sommt'r fra vintcr.
11";1d Dl' fOfl'tra'kker, ved vi ikkt·.

..

DEN KONGELIGE

go right on producing results through boom and reces.."ion, against
shirting competitive pressures, and changes of personnd. T he
Hathaway eyepatch fi rst appeared in 1951. and is stil l going strong.
Every Dove commercial since 1955 has promised that, ' Dovc doesn't dry
ｾ＠ The American Express commercials, 'Do
your skin the way soap ｣｡ｮ
you know me?' have been running since 1975. And Leo Burnett's
Marlboro campaign has been running for 25 years.

Below To"rychagrin , tltiscam/Jaign,
which I tltoughl me/llm/ing, CTtaltd ｳ ｣｡ｲｵｾ＠

anppk. Ｗｨ･､ｯｧｵＮｷｭｹｲｩ｡ｃｾ＠
Brulie.Judson Irish wrolt the ､ｩ｡Ｑｯｧｾ＠
in
lht stykoJAlfrtdJingk ill Pickwick
Papers.

Make the product the hero
Whenever you can, make the product itself the hero of your ad vertising.
If you think the product too dull , I have news ror you: thcre are no dull
products, only dull writers. I never assign a product to a writer unless I
know that he is personally interested in it. Every time I have written a
bad campaign, it has been because the product did not interest me.
A problem which conrronts agencies is that so many products are
no different from their competitors. Manufacturers havr access to the
sa mr technology; marketing Ix-opk usc the samr rt.'Sca rch proced ures to

,"I nn."" , Ha pI'Y

n:1."". . Many.

,Ol nluo" , N _ _

1.ooJt.head! N_ _ tloo..

Ｇｾ＠

ltoeb .n ｾ＠

nino" , No, . , . n
ｏｲｹｾ

'01 nn_o" , Of".,.".,
ｾＧＭｵｴｲ･ｮ＾ｬｹ｣ｯ､＠

ｲｴｊｭ

ｎ

...
ｾｨｯｮＮｵｴ＠

Ruon·on Rocb.
Ｎ

ｍ

｟

Ｌｲｮ

SUbtle cWr_

ｰｯ＠

.....nl.

FIoopI.o oIwNId ｵｾｮｴＮ＠

N _ _ ,YIlIC

MPP1rf:1.w',-.

Right Good ideas coml from Ih"
uncol/scious. 771laulhordre(l11l.ed about W I
old baker drilling hir hom (lnd wagon (liong
a country lane 011 his Wfglo de/i/£T
Peppend..l!,t Fann bread. ｔｷｴＷｬｯＭｦｾ＠
)'torJ
later lhe hom and wagon orf sI1I1111 Iht
(mnmerdalr.

determ ine consumer prererences for ｣ｯｬｏ
ｾ＠ size. dcsit,m. taste and so on.
\\'hen la,rd wi th selling ' parity' pnxlucls, all you can hOjX' to do is
f'.x plain their virtut's more persuas ively than yo ur competitors, and to
difierciltiate them hy till" style or your ad\·crtising. Thi s is the 'add ed
\';du c' which adve rtising contributes, and I a m not suOicicn tl y
puritanical to hate rn yselffor it.

'The positively good'
My partner J oel Raphaclson has articulated a feeli ng which has been
g rowing in 111 )' mind fo r some lim c:
' [ 11 the IXISI,juSI abo ut tyery acivertiser has a ssu mcdt hat in
orcif-r lU sell his gcxxls he has IOcoll\'incc consum ers that his
procl ilci is slIj)nior to his com petit or's.
'Thi s may 110\ be necessa ry. It ma y be surllcien t 10
com 'in er consumers lha t your prod uct iSj)osiliw[}'p,ood. If the
COllsLltllerfe('ls re rtain Iha t your produ ct is good and rerls
un certain abo ul your compe tito r·s. he will bu y yOllrs.
' Il'you alld your competitors al l ma ke excellent proouc,s.
don't try 10 illlpl)' th a t your procll.l ct is beller. Jusl say what 's
g()(xl about your product - (llId do (I rlemer. more hOllrst. 11/0 1'1'
il1jimllath'ejob rljsqying it.
' 1f th is theory is right , sales will swing 10 Ih(' m a rkel cr who
clot'S the best job or creating' confiden ce that his pnx luct is
jXJsitil'f(I'good.'
This approach to acln'rtising pa rity products d ocs no t insult the
il1\dl igf>llceof consutllers. \'Vho ca ll blallle YOLI fo r put ling your bes t fOOl
forward?

Repeat your winners
(f you a re lucky eno ugh to \\,1;t c a gcxKl adv('rli selllel1t , repc;.t t it ulllil il
SlOpS selling. Sco res or g()(Xi advenisemenls have been discarded I)(fore
they lost their IXltency.
Resea rch shows Ihal lhe readership of an advertisement does not
declille when il is run s('vera l limes in lhe sa me magazine. Rcadership

'You ar en't advertising to a
standing army; you are
advertising to a moving
parade!

remains a t the sa me level throughou t <1 1 least rour repeti lio ns.
'{ou aren't aeh'cnisi ng 10 a sta ndi ng arm y; you are ｡｣ｬｶｴＢ
ｲｴｩ ｳ ｩｮ ｾ＠ loa
moving parade. The advertisemellt wh ich solei ＼ ｾ＠ n:fi-igcrato r to couplt's
who got manitd ｉ＼ｾ＠
)<'<lr wi ll probably be J.ust as successful with
cou ple:. wlloget married th is yCllr. A good aeh 'crnscll1e nt can be thought
o ras a raelar swecp. constan tly hun ting Il t \\ p rospects as lh e) com e into
the market. Get a gocxl radar. and keep it s\ . . etping.
I-lenl'} Fo rd o nce ",aid to a cop},wlitcr on his accou nt. 'B ill, that
ca mpa ig n ｏｦＩｬ
ｬ ｾ＠ is d ;:md), bUI d o \\c haw' [0 run itJorcr:er?' '10 which
tht eopywlitcr repl ied. Ｇｾ ｉ ｲ＠ fore!' the ca mp(l ign has not yetapPl'ared.'
Ford had SC'cn it too often at 100 many mee tings. The hest way to sett lesuch a rgu lllenl!. is [0 meas ure tlit' ｳ･ｬ ｬｩｮ ｾ＠ cfl;xti\'cll css of your ｣ＮＺＢＱ ｭ ｰ｡ｩｾｮ＠
a l fl:gular in t{....,'ais. a nd togo on run ning it un[i l th e resea rch ｳ ｨ ｏ｜Ｇｾ＠
lhal
it has \\'0111 o ul.

Word of mouth
It somt:l imes happens that aelvcnising- campaigns cntcr the culiul'{'.
'l 'hus th e Illllsica l lhcmc in <t ｾ ｉ ＨｬｸＢＬ､
ｬ＠ Housccofl cc cum m crcia l hl'Glnlt
:'-iurn bcr 7 on tht hit parade. Afttr Commander \\'hitehead slarted
a ppcaling in Sch wcppes adven isim-\:. he becanlf' a lXlpuiar pa rticipant
in talk shows on television. Th is kind ｯｦ ｴ ｨｩｮ ｧ ｩｾ＠ man na fiu m h \;·.-l\ ·<:I1 , but
nobody knows how tndo it o n purpose. Atleas l. I don't.
Fifty yea rs ago allemp ts wt're made in England to cu lti va te
word-of-moUlh ad vertising b) sprcacl ing a necdotcs like tll is one:

'An old C"1 rm cr\\'as \\'a lking do\\ n a ro.:"1d. bcn t double: \\ ilh
rheUm<'llisl ll . SOIllt'one: in a Ro lls-Royce stopped lOs pe,,1. k to
him . rlo ld hi m to take Ikccham's Pi lJ:,. Doyoll kno\\'\\'hoit
\\,;1S? nlf ｋｩ

ｩｬ Ｌｾ ｲ＠

Doriot."

Down with co mmittees
Ｇ｜ ｉ ｯｾ ｴ＠ ca m paigns an' tOO com plica tcd. ｔｨ
ＨＧｾ＠
reflect a long list or
ｯ ｴ ｾＨＧ｣ｴｩ｜ｻ
Ｇｳ Ｎ＠ and try to reconci le the ､ｩ｜Ｇｃｲ
ｾ ･ｬｴ＠
\·iews of too Illany
exccu ti \"f's. By ｡ｬ｛｣ｲｮｰｩｴ
ｾ＠ (0 covcr tpO m a llY ｴｨｩ ｮ ｧｾ Ｌ＠ lhf') achicvf'
noth ing.
aciWrl iSClllcll ts I()( )k like lhe
\_ lany com m ercials .Hlel ｭ ｡ ｮｾ＠
m inule::. ora coml niltt"t" . I II ｉ｜ ｾ＠ ("'X llt Til'llcl', com mittees ca n crit icize, but
tllf'y can not (Teale.
'Search til(' P,lI'ks in ,\I! your cities
Yo u'll li ne! no "tattlc<; ol"com mitlCC'i.'

. \ gellcics haw LI " 'flY of cn'a ling cd mpa ig ns in coillmill t't's. They c(\ 11 il
'!C<'IITI-\\'o rk '. \\'hncall Ｈ Ｑｉ Ｉｾ ｕｬ Ｇ＠ with team-\\ork?
T he process or pnxluci n!{ ｡ ､ ｜ＧＨﾷｲｴｩ
ｳ ｩｮｾ＠
campaig ns 1110\'(,5 at a sna ils
pace. Ques tions of ＺＭ ｉｬ Ｈ ｬＨ Ｇｾ＠
arc .Ir'{ued by ｣ｯ ｭ ｬ ｩ ｜Ｈ･ ＨＧｾ＠ of the client 's
brand ｭ ＼ｬ ｬ ､ ｧ ＨＬｬ ｾ＠ ;'Ind ti le Ｎ ｉＡ ＺＮｻ･ ｮ ｣ｾ＠ Ｎｾ＠ dCCOUI1I ･ｸ｣ｻＧｌ
ｬｴｩ｜ＢＧ
ＬｾＮ＠ who 1I.I\'ea vested
in[('rest ill pmlollt;"ing Ihe arg-umelll as l11uch as poss ible: it is ho\\" thcy
ea rn their li\·ing. The rest'a rclwrs lake mOll lhs 10 dns"'cr ei c"lTlell tary
questio ns. \\ 'hcn tht' <:opr\\ I-il ers fi lial!) get down to \\ ork , lilt") dawdle
aoout ill braill-SlOn ni llg ＺＮｴﾷｾｩ
ｻｊｉ ｜ ＺＧ＠ ,m el o ther forms of \\ hct·l-spinn ing. If a
copyw ritcrm'crages an hour , I wt.'t'k aeLUally writing. he is exceptional.

Gestation
Rals
22 days

I

Rabbils
31 days
Skunks

62 days
Hyenas
110days

Ad Agencies
117days
Goats
151 days
Baboons
183 days
Elephants

365 days

Above Adrertising agencitJ luwe agtmius
flrwheel-spiTUw,g.77!t(l;f"laagetimeit
taka tn to produce a uunpaign is 117 days
jaskr than goats but s/lJl.«I" thnnhyenas.

Thc average periocl of gestation is somcwhere between that of
hyenas (110 d"ys) a nd goats (15 1 days). For exa mple, storyboa rds ror
commercials are argued a t level aftcr level in the agency, and level after
level in the client's organization. If they suniive, they are ulen procluced
and .tested. The average COP)",,,ri tcr geLS only dll"ee commercials a year
cnllir.

Ambition
Few copyw,iters are a mbiliolls. It does not occur 10 mem dlat if they
oied hard enough, ·they might d ouble the client's sales, and make
themselves famous. 'Raise your sigh ts! ' I exhonthem. 'Blaze nev" (rails!
Hit the ball out of the park!! Compete wi th the immorta ls! !!'
Leo Bumen said it better, ' \t\'hen you reach ror the stars, you may
not quite gcr one, but you won't come up \vith a handluJ of mud either?

Pursuilofknowledge
I once asked Sir Hugh Rigby, Surgeon to King George V, '\lVhat makes
a great surgeon?' Sir H ugh repli(.-d, 'There isn't much to choose bel\veen
surgeons in mall ual d e.x leliry. ''''hat distinguishes the greal surgeon is
that he krwwJ more than other surgeons.' I t is the same with advertising
agents. The gcxxl ones k,WW more.
I asked an indiffer en t cop)",vriter wha t books he had read about
advertising. He told me ular he had not re.:'ld any; he preferred to rely on
his own intuition. 'Su p!X>Se: I as ked, 'your gall-bl add er has to be
removed this evening. ' '''ill you choose a surgeon who has read some
books on anatomy and knows where to find your gal l-bladder, or a
surgeon ",..-ho relies on his intuition? \Vhy should our dients be expeCted
to bet millions of dolla rs on your int uition?'
This willful refusal to learn dle rudimen ts of the craft is all too
common. I cannot think of any other profession wh ich gets byon such a
small corpus of knowledge. Millions are spent on testing individual
commercials and advertisemenl:S, but next to nothing is done to analyse
the resul ts of those tests in sea rch of plus a nd m in us factors. Advertising
te.xtbooks have nouling to sayan the subjecL
When he had been head ofJ . \-Valter Thompson for i15 years, the
great Stanley Resor wid me, ' Every year we spend hundrcrls of millions
of doll ars of our clients' money. At U1C end of it, what do we k,ww?
Nothing. So t\\'o years ago I asked four of our people to try and identify
ractors \,,'hi ch usually v·...ork. Thl")' already have twelve: I was too polite
to tell him Ulat I had ninety-six.
Advertising agencies waste their client's money repeating the
sa me mistakes. I recently cOll nled 49 advertisemen ts set in reverse
(\vhite type on black backgrou nd ) in one issue ofa magazine, long years
after research demonstralCd that reverse is dij]icult to read.
\-\fhat is the reason for this fail ure to cod ifY experience? Is it thaI
advertising docs not attract inquiri ng minds? Is it that any kind of
scientific methocl is beyond the grasp of 'creative' people? Are they afraid
that knowledge would impose some discipline on thei r work?
11 has not always been so. When George Gallup was Research
Dil:ecLOr at Young & Rubicam in the thirties, he not only measured the

IfmOTl cop'ywriters wert! amhltlOus, tlu;y too
wouldf Ull/fame andfl r(l/llt. 77tis is
Touffiu , tIle mtdiiwl castle where tht
milltor holes liP whellhe is ,wi visiting one of
the OgillfY & .t1ntlier offllfJ".

readership of advertisements, he ＨｬｃＯｾｮｵＧｴ､＠
tlU! scores and GlUl/ysed them.
Certain techniques, he found, ｃｏｉｬＡＩ
ｬ ｳ ｾ･ ｬｴ ｹ＠ ou t-penormt'Cl others. A
brilliant a n director called Vaughn l' ldnner), la tched on to Gallup's
discovclies and applied them. \Vithin a few l1lomhs. Young & Rubic.1.m
advertisemen ts were bei ng read by Illore people than any other
agency's, to thc incalculable benefi t ofthei rcli enls.
Mills Shepherd conducted similar research 0 11 the edi torial
content in J/cCa/lj, and came up wi th similar results. He found , for
e,''(ample, that photOgraphs of fi nished disht:s consistcn lly att racted
more readers tha n photographs of the raw ingred ients. Recipes, printed
on recipe carels. were su re-fire wi th housewives.
Using lhe sa me research technique, Harold Sy kes n'eastl red the
readership ofadvertisements in newspapers. He reported that \ .--d itOlial'
gra phics we re consistenlly high pcrfonncrs.
In 19+7, I larolci Rudolph , who had been Research Director in
Stirling GClchr l's agency, published a book on the subject.* O ne of his
observations was th at photogra phs with an clement of 'story appea l'
"'Allmliollami bUmsl Faclors in Adl'tTtumg b) H. Rudolph. Funk & \ ragnalL 1947

'A blind pig can sometimes
find truffles, but it helps to
know that they are found in
oak forests!

were rar above average in attracling atlention. This led me to put an
eye-patch on the model ｩｾ＠ ｾ ｹ＠ advertiscmelllS ror Hathaway shirts.
Later, the advertIsing communi ty turned its back on such
research. Agcncic.s ｜ ｾ ｨ ｩ ｣ ｨ＠ pio.ne-creel the search ror knowledge now excel
in violating the pn nClples thell· predecessors had discovered.
Clients ｳｯ ｮｾ ･ ｴｩｭ ･ｳ＠ change agencies because one agency can buy
circulation a t a slightly lower cost than another. They don't realize that a
copywri ter who knows his factors - the triggers which make people read.
advertisements - can reach man y times more readers than a copY""riter
who docsn't.
For 35 years I have continued on th e course charted by Gallup,
coUecting factors the way other men collect pictures and postage
stamps. Ir you choose to ignore these factors, good luck (Q you. A blind
pig can sometimes find trunIes, but it helps to know that they are found
in oak foreslS.
It is rema rkable how little the plus and minus factors have
dla nged ovt:r th e years. \l\1ith very few exceptions, consumers continue
to react to the same techniques in the same ways.

The lessons of direct response
For all their research, most advenisers never know for sure whether their
advertisemen ts sell. Too many Olher factors cloud the equation. But
d irect- res ponse advenisers, who solicit orders by mail or telephone,
know to a dollar how much each advertisement sells. So watch the kind
of ad vertising t.h ey do. You will notice important differences between
tlleif techniques and the techniques ofgeneral ad vcrtisers. For e.xample:
Gcneral ad vertisers usc30-secoTlflcom mercials. But the
direct response fraternilY have learned tha I it is more
profi table to usc two-minute commercials. Who, do you
suppose, is morc likely to be right?
Genera l advertise rs broadcast their commercials in
ex pensive /Jrime lime, when the audience is at its peak. But
direct response advertisers have learned tha t they make
mort sa les If/leal night. \-Vho, do yot! suppose, is more likel y to
be right?

In their magazineadvcnise mcnlS, general advertisers use
J"/tort copy, but th e direct response people invariably use long
copy. \Vho, doyou suppose, is more li kel y to be right?
I am convinced that if"all advertisers we re to follow the exam ple ofmeir
direct response bret hren. they wou ld gt:l more sales per dollar. Every
copywriter should start his ca reer by spelld ing two years in direct
res ponse. O ne glance at any campaign tells me whether its author has
ever had that ex perience.
Do J practice what I preach? Not always. J have created my share
on:'lncy campaigns. but ir you ask \vh ich of my advertisements has been
the most successflli, I will answer withoUl hesi tation that it was the fi rs l

ad I Wl'Ot(· fiJ I' illclustrial dcvclopnwnt in PU (,T10 Rico. It won no awards
for 'creativit y; but il Ixrsliaded scores ofma nu[lclu rcrs to stan ｦｾｉｃｴｏｊＱＨＺｓ＠
in that povcrty-slrickrll i!:llanci.
Sad to say, a n agenC} which ｰｲｯ､ｬｾ｣＠
not ｨｩｮｾ＠
but this kind of
down-to-earth advenising \,,'ould never wm a reputation for 'creativity:
and would wi liH'r on th c\'ine.
ｩ ｳ｣ ｭ ･ ｮ ｴ＠ which pleases
\Vhat is a go<xl ach'crlisemenl ? i\n ＼ｬ､ｶ･ｲｾ
you lx:causc of its style, or an advertisement whi ch sells the most? They
are seldom til(" sa me. Go through a magazine and pick Out lhe
advcnisemems you like best. You will probably pick those with beau tiful
illustrations, or clever copy. You forget to ask yourself 'Yvhcther your
f.'1vOlite advertiscmelHs would make you want to buy the producl. Says
Rosser Reeves, of lhe 'led Bates agency:
' I'm not saying tha t channing, winy and warm copy won't
sell. I' mjust sayi ng that I've seen thousa nds of channing,
willy campaigns that didn't. Let's say YO LI arc a
manu[lcturcr. Your advertisi ng isn't \. . u rking and your sales
are going down. And every thing depends on it. Yourflilure
d epends all it, your famil y's future depends on it. other
people's lamiliesdepend on it. And you wa lk in this office
ancltalk to me, and YOll sit in that cha ir.l\o\\\ what doyoll
want out of me? Fine\\'liting? Do you wan t mas terpi eces;
00 you want glowi ng th ings that can be framed by
copywri leI'S? Or dO)'01I Zlxmt to see the gor/damned sales a/11£ stop

mmrin,l? down and slart moving up?'*-

, If it doesn't sell, it isn't
creative:

The cultof'crealivity'
The Benton & Bowles agency holds that 'if it doesn't sell , it isn't
crea ti\·c; Amell.
You \von't fmel 'creati vity' in tlw 12-volume Oxfo rd Di ctionalY Do
you thi nk it means originaliry? Says Rccyes, 'Oligi nali ty is the most
dangerous word in advertis ing. Preocc up ied with originality,
copywriters purs ue somethi ng as illusory as swamp fire, for which the
I .arill p il PHS(, is igllisjatufl)i.·
Moza rt sa id, " 1 have nevrr ll1adr the slightest cRuft to compose
any thing original :
I occasionally usc the hideous \vord creative myself, for lack of a
hetln If yoll take the subjcc.:t1l1ore scriously th an I do. I suggest you
read The ｃｲ･｡ｴｩｬｾ＠
ｏ ｾｬ＿ｭ
ｩ＼Ｎ ｡ｴｩｯｬＮ＠
published by the University of Ch icago
Press. Y1.eanwhi le, I have to invent a Big Idea for a new advertising
ca mpaign, and I havr to invent it Ix·forl" Tuesday. 'C rca ti vity' sllikes me
as a high-falu[in word for the work I have 10 do brtween now and
·liJ(:sd ay.
A fcv.' years ago, I-larry IV1cMahan drew attcn tion to the ki nd of
commercials w hich were wi nn ing the f.'1mous C lio awards for creativi ty:
Agencies that won four of the C lios Ilad lost the accounts.
AnoliH'r C lio winlu·r wa..o.; out of business.
"Rmli!}lirJ lldmlifillg, by R. R(.'{'vcs. AJfred A. Knopr, f ile., 196!



======================================================================
FILE: ScientificAdvertising.txt
======================================================================

Scientific
Advertising
by
Claude C. Hopkins

The Original Text
Produced, Proofed, & Distributed
by

Carl Galletti
ScientificAdvertising.com
Carl Galletti

-1-

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 1
How Advertising Laws Are
Established
The time has come when advertising has in some
hands reached the status of a science. It is based on
fixed principles and is reasonably exact. The causes
and effects have been analyzed until they are well
understood. The correct methods of procedure have
been proved and established. We know what is most
effective, and we act on basic laws.
Advertising, once a gamble, has thus become, under
able direction, one of the safest business ventures.
Certainly no other enterprise with comparable
possibilities need involve so little risk.
Therefore, this book deals, not with theories and
opinions, but with well-proved principles and facts. It
is written as a text book for students and a safe guide
for advertisers. Every statement has been weighed.
The book is confined to established fundamentals. If
Carl Galletti

-2-

ScientificAdvertising.com

we enter any realms of uncertainty we shall carefully
denote them.
The present status of advertising is due to many
reasons. Much national advertising has long been
handled by large organizations known as advertising
agencies. Some of these agencies, in their hundreds of
campaigns, have tested and compared the thousands
of plans and ideas. The results have been watched and
recorded, so no lessons have been lost.
Such agencies employ a high grade of talent. None
but able and experienced men can meet the
requirements in national advertising. Working in cooperation, learning from each other and from each
new undertaking, some of these men develop into
masters.
Individuals may come and go, but they leave their
records and ideas behind them. These become a part
of the organization's equipment, and a guide to all who
follow. Thus, in the course of decades, such agencies
become storehouses of advertising experiences,
proved principles, and methods.
The larger agencies also come into intimate contact
with experts in every department of business. Their
clients are usually dominating concerns. So they see
the results of countless methods and polices. They
become a clearing house for everything pertaining to
Carl Galletti

-3-

ScientificAdvertising.com

merchandising. Nearly every selling question which
arises in business is accurately answered by many
experiences.
Under these conditions, where they long exist,
advertising and merchandising become exact sciences.
Every course is charted. The compass of accurate
knowledge directs the shortest, safest, cheapest course
to any destination.
We learn the principles and prove them by repeated
tests. This is done through keyed advertising, by
traced returns, largely by the use of coupons. We
compare one way with many others, backward and
forward, and record the results. When one method
invariably proves best, that method becomes a fixed
principle.
Mail order advertising is traced down to the fraction
of a penny. The cost per reply and cost per dollar of
sale show up with utter exactness.
One ad is compared with another, one method with
another. Headlines, settings, sizes, arguments and
pictures are compared. To reduce the cost of results
even one per cent means much in some mail order
advertising. So no guesswork is permitted. One must
know what is best. Thus mail order advertising first
established many of our basic laws.
Carl Galletti

-4-

ScientificAdvertising.com

In lines where direct returns are impossible we
compare one town with another. Scores of methods
may be compared in this way, measured by cost of
sales.
But the most common way is by use of the coupon.
We offer a sample, a book, a free package, or
something to induce direct replies. Thus we learn the
amount of action which each ad engenders.
But those figures are not final. One ad may bring too
many worthless replies, another replies that are
valuable. So our final conclusions are always based on
cost per customer or cost per dollar of sale.
These coupon plans are dealt with further in the
chapter on "Test Campaigns." Here we explain only
how we employ them to discover advertising
principles.
In a large ad agency coupon returns are watched
and recorded on hundreds of different lines. In a single
line they are sometimes recorded on thousands of
separate ads. Thus we test everything pertaining to
advertising. We answer nearly every possible question
by multitudinous traced returns.
Some things we learn in this way apply only to
particular lines. But even those supply basic principles
for analogous undertakings.
Carl Galletti

-5-

ScientificAdvertising.com

Others apply to all lines. They become fundamentals
for advertising in general. They are universally
applied. No wise advertiser will ever depart from
those unvarying laws.
We propose in this book to deal with those
fundamentals, those universal principles. To teach
only established technic. There is that technic in
advertising, as in all art, science and mechanics. And it
is, as in all lines, a basic essential.
The lack of those fundamentals has been the main
trouble with advertising of the past. Each worker was
a law unto himself. All previous knowledge, all
progress in the line, was a closed book to him. It was
like a man trying to build a modern locomotive
without first ascertaining what others had done. It was
like a Columbus starting out to find an undiscovered
land.
Men were guided by whims and fancies – vagrant,
changing breezes. They rarely arrived at their port.
When they did – by accident – it was by a long
roundabout course.
Each early mariner in this sea mapped his own
separate course. There were no charts to guide him.
Not a lighthouse marked a harbor, not a buoy showed
a reef. The wrecks were unrecorded, so countless
ventures came to grief on the same rocks and shoals.
Carl Galletti

-6-

ScientificAdvertising.com

Advertising was then a gamble – a speculation of the
rashest sort. One man's guess on the proper course
was as likely to be as good as another’s. There were no
safe pilots, because few sailed the same course twice.
That condition has been corrected. Now the only
uncertainties pertain to people and to products, not to
methods. It is hard to measure human idiosyncrasies,
the preferences and prejudices, the likes and dislikes
that exist. We cannot say that an article will be
popular, but we know how to find out very quickly. We
do know how to sell it in the most effective way.
Ventures may fail, but the failures are not disasters.
Losses, when they occur, are but trifling. And the
causes are factors which have nothing to do with the
advertising.
Advertising has flourished under these new
conditions. It has multiplied in volume, in prestige and
respect. The perils have been almost eliminated. The
results have increased many fold. Just because the
gamble has become a science, the speculation a very
conservative business.
These facts should be recognized by all. This is no
proper field for sophistry or theory, or for any other
will-o'-the-wisp. The blind leading the blind is
ridiculous. It is pitiful in a field with such vast
possibilities. Success is a rarity, maximum success an
Carl Galletti

-7-

ScientificAdvertising.com

impossibility, unless one is guided by laws as
immutable as the law of gravitation.
So our main purpose here is to set down those laws,
and to tell you how to prove them for yourself. After
them come a myriad of variations. No two advertising
campaigns are ever conducted on lines that are
identical. Individuality is an essential. Imitation is a
reproach. But those variable things which depend on
ingenuity have no place in a text book on advertising.
This is for groundwork only.
Our hope is to foster advertising through a better
understanding. To place it on a business basis. To have
it recognized as among the safest, surest ventures
which lead to large returns.
Thousands of conspicuous successes show its
possibilities. Their variety points out its almost
unlimited scope. Yet thousands who need it – who can
never attain their deserts without it – still look upon
its accomplishments as somewhat accidental.
That was so, but it is not so now. We hope that this
book will throw some new lights on the subject.

Carl Galletti

-8-

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 2
Just Salesmanship
To properly understand advertising or to learn even
its rudiments one must start with the right conception.
Advertising is salesmanship. Its principles are the
principles of salesmanship. Successes and failures in
both lines are due to like causes. Thus every
advertising question should be answered by the
salesman's standards.
Let us emphasize that point. The only purpose of
advertising is to make sales. It is profitable or
unprofitable according to its actual sales.
It is not for general effect. It is not to keep your
name before the people. It is not primarily to aid your
other salesmen.
Treat it as a salesman. Force it to justify itself.
Compare it with other salesmen. Figure its cost and
result. Accept no excuses which good salesmen do not
make. Then you will not go far wrong.
Carl Galletti

-9-

ScientificAdvertising.com

The difference is only in degree. Advertising is
multiplied salesmanship. It may appeal to thousands
while the salesman talks to one. It involves a
corresponding cost. Some people spend $10 per word
on an average advertisement. Therefore every ad
should be a super-salesman.
A salesman's mistake may cost little. An advertising
mistake may cost a thousand times as much. Be more
cautious, more exacting, therefore.
A mediocre salesman may affect a small part of your
trade. Mediocre advertising affects all of your trade.
Many think of advertising as ad-writing. Literary
qualifications have no more to do with it than oratory
has with salesmanship.
One must be able to express himself briefly, clearly
and convincingly, just as a salesman must. But fine
writing is a distinct disadvantage. So is unique literary
style. They take attention from the subject. They
reveal the hook. Any studied attempt to sell, if
apparent, creates corresponding resistance.
That is so in personal salesmanship as in
salesmanship-in-print. Fine talkers are rarely good
salesmen. They inspire buyers with the fear of overinfluence. They create the suspicion that an effort is
made to sell them on other lines than merit.
Carl Galletti

- 10 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Successful salesmen are rarely good speech makers.
They have few oratorical graces. They are plain and
sincere men who know their customers and know
their lines. So it is in ad-writing.
Many of the ablest men in advertising are graduate
salesmen. The best we know have been house-tohouse canvassers. They may know little of grammar,
nothing of rhetoric, but they know how to use words
that convince.
There is one simple and right way to answer many
advertising questions. Ask yourself,"Would this help a
salesman sell the goods?" "Would it help me sell them
if I met the buyer in person?"
A fair answer to those questions avoids countless
mistakes. But when one tries to show off, or does
things merely to please himself, he is little likely to
strike a chord which leads people to spend money.
Some argue for slogans, some like clever conceits.
Would you use them in personal salesmanship? Can
you imagine a customer whom such things would
impress? If not, don't rely on them for selling in print.
Some say "Be very brief. People will read but little."
Would you say that to a salesman? With a prospect
standing before him, would you confine him to any
certain number of words? That would be an
unthinkable handicap.
Carl Galletti

- 11 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

So in advertising. The only readers we get are
people whom our subject interests. No one reads ads
for amusement, long or short. Consider them as
prospects standing before you, seeking for
information. Give them enough to get action.
Some advocate large type and big headlines. Yet
they do not admire salesmen who talk in loud voices.
People read all they care to read in 8-point type. Our
magazines and newspapers are printed in that type.
Folks are accustomed to it. Anything larger is like loud
conversation. It gains no attention worth while. It may
not be offensive, but it is useless and wasteful. It
multiplies the cost of your story. And to many it seems
loud and blatant.
Others look for something queer and unusual. They
want ads distinctive in style or illustration. Would you
want that in a salesman? Do not men who act and
dress in normal ways make a far better impression?
Some insist on dressy ads. That is all right to a
certain degree, but is quite unimportant. Some poorlydressed ads, like poorly-dressed men, prove to be
excellent salesmen. Over-dress in either is a fault.
So with countless questions. Measure them by
salesmen's standards, not by amusement standards.
Ads are not written to entertain. When they do, those
Carl Galletti

- 12 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

entertainment seekers are little likely to be the people
whom you want.
That is one of the greatest advertising faults. Adwriters abandon their parts. They forget they are
salesmen and try to be performers. Instead of sales,
they seek applause.
When you plan and prepare an advertisement, keep
before you a typical buyer. Your subject, your headline
has gained his or her attention. Then in everything be
guided by what you would do if you met the buyer
face-to-face. If you are a normal man and a good
salesman you will then do your level best.
Don't think of people in the mass. That gives you a
blurred view. Think of a typical individual, man or
woman, who is likely to want what you sell. Don't try
to be amusing. Money spending is a serious matter.
Don't boast, for all people resent it. Don't try to show
off. Do just what you think a good salesman should do
with a half-sold person before him.
Some advertising men go out in person and sell to
people before they plan or write an ad. One of the
ablest of them has spent weeks on one article, selling
from house to house. In this way they learn the
reactions from different forms of argument and
approach. They learn what possible buyers want and
Carl Galletti

- 13 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

the factors which don't appeal. It is quite customary to
interview hundreds of possible customers.
Others send out questionnaires to learn the attitude
of the buyers. In some way all must learn how to strike
responsive chords. Guesswork is very expensive.
The maker of an advertised article knows the
manufacturing side and probably the dealer’s side. But
this very knowledge often leads him astray in respect
to customers. His interests are not their interests.
The advertising man studies the consumer. He tries
to place himself in the position of the buyer. His
success largely depends on doing that to the exclusion
of everything else.
This book will contain no more important chapter
than this one on salesmanship. The reason for most of
the non-successes in advertising is trying to sell
people what they do not want. But next to that comes
lack of true salesmanship.
Ads are planned and written with some utterly
wrong conception. They are written to please the
seller. The interests of the buyer are forgotten. One
can never sell goods profitably, in person or in print,
when that attitude exists.

Carl Galletti

- 14 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 3
Offer Service
Remember the people you address are selfish, as we
all are. They care nothing about your interest or your
profit. They seek service for themselves. Ignoring this
fact is a common mistake and a costly mistake in
advertising. Ads say in effect, "Buy my brand. Give me
the trade you give to others. Let me have the money."
That is not a popular appeal.
The best ads ask no one to buy. That is useless.
Often they do not quote a price. They do not say that
dealers handle the product.
The ads are based entirely on service. They offer
wanted information. They site advantages to users.
Perhaps they offer a sample, or to buy the first
package, or to send something on approval, so the
customer may prove the claims without any cost or
risk.

Carl Galletti

- 15 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Some of these ads seem altruistic. But they are
based on a knowledge of human nature. The writers
know how people are led to buy.
Here again is salesmanship. The good salesman
does not merely cry a name. He doesn't say, "Buy my
article." He pictures the customer’s side of his service
until the natural result is to buy.
A brush maker has some 2,000 canvassers who sell
brushes from house to house. He is enormously
successful in a line which would seem very difficult.
And it would be if his men asked the housewives to
buy.
But they don't. They go to the door and say, "I was
sent here to give you a brush. I have samples here and
I want you to take your choice."
The housewife is all smiles and attention. In picking
out one brush she sees several she wants. She is also
anxious to reciprocate the gift. So the salesman gets an
order.
Another concern sells coffee, etc., by wagons in
some 500 cities. The man drops in with a half-pound of
coffee and says, "Accept this package and try it. I'll
come back in a few days to ask how you like it."
Even when he comes back he doesn't ask for an
order. He explains that he wants to send the women a
fine kitchen utensil. It isn't free, but if she likes the
Carl Galletti

- 16 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

coffee he will credit five cents on each pound she buys
until she has paid for the article. Always some service.
The maker of an electric sewing machine motor
found advertising difficult. So, on good advice, he
ceased soliciting a purchase. He offered to send to any
home, through any dealer, a motor for one week’s use.
With it would come a man to show how to operate."Let
us help you for a week without cost or obligation," said
the ad. Such an offer was resistless, and about nine in
ten of the trials led to sales.
So in many, many lines. Cigar makers send out
boxes to anyone and say, "Smoke ten, then keep them
or return them, as you wish." Makers of books,
typewriters, washing machines, kitchen cabinets,
vacuum sweepers, etc., send out their products
without any prepayment. They say, "Use them a week,
then do as you wish." Practically all merchandise sold
by mail is sent subject to return.
These are all common principles of salesmanship.
The most ignorant peddler applies them. Yet the
salesman-in-print very often forgets them. He talks
about his interests. He blazons a name, as though that
was of any importance. His phrase is, "Drive people to
the stores," and that is his attitude in everything he
says.
Carl Galletti

- 17 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

People can be coaxed but not driven. Whatever they
do they do to please themselves. Many fewer mistakes
would be made in advertising if these facts were never
forgotten.

Carl Galletti

- 18 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 4
Mail Order Advertising –
What It Teaches
The severest test of an advertising man is in selling
goods by mail. But that is a school from which he must
graduate before he can hope for success. There cost
and result are immediately apparent. False theories
melt away like snowflakes in the sun. The advertising
is profitable or it is not, clearly on the face of returns.
Figures which do not lie tell one at once the merits of
an ad.
This puts men on their mettle. All guesswork is
eliminated. Every mistake is conspicuous. One quickly
loses his conceit by learning how often his judgment
errs - often nine times in ten.
There one learns that advertising must be done on a
scientific basis to have any fair chance at success. And
he learns how every wasted dollar adds to the cost of
results.
Carl Galletti

- 19 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Here he is a tought efficiency and economy under a
master who can't be fooled. Then, and only then, is he
apt to apply the same principles and keys to all
advertising.
A man was selling a five-dollar article. The replies
from his ad cost him 85 cents. Another man submitted
an ad which he thought better. The replies cost $14.20
each. Another man submitted an ad which for two
years brought replies at an average of 41 cents each.
Consider that difference, on 250,000 replies per
year. Think how valuable was the man who cut the
cost in two. Think what it would have meant to have
continued that $14.20 ad without any key on returns.
Yet there are thousands of advertisers who do just
that. They spend large sums on a guess. And they are
doing what that man did -- paying for sales from 2 to
35 times what they need cost.
A study of mail order advertising reveals many
things worth learning. It is a prime subject for study.
In the first place, if continued, you know what pays. It
is therefore good advertising as applied to that line.
The probability is that the ad has resulted from
many traced comparisons. It is therefore the best
advertising yet discovered for that line.
Study those ads with respect. There is proved
advertising, not theoretical. It will not deceive you.
Carl Galletti

- 20 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

The lessons it teaches are principles which wise men
apply to all advertising.
Mail order advertising is always set in small type. It
is usually set in smaller type than ordinary print. That
economy of space is universal. So it proves
conclusively that larger type does not pay.
Remember that when you double your space by
doubling the size of your type. The ad may still be
profitable. But traced returns have proved that you are
paying a double price for sales.
In mail order advertising there is no waste of space.
Every line is utilized. Borders are rarely used.
Remember that when you are tempted to leave
valuable space unoccupied.
In mail order advertising there is no palaver. There
is no boasting, save of super-service. There is no
useless talk. There is no attempt at entertainment.
There is nothing to amuse.
Mail order advertising usually contains a coupon.
That is there to get some action from the converts
partly made. It is there to cut out as a reminder of
something the reader has decided to do.
Mail order advertisers know that readers forget.
They are reading a magazine of interest. They may be
absorbed in a story. A large percentage of people who
read an ad and decide to act will forget that decision in
Carl Galletti

- 21 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

five minutes. The mail order advertiser knows that
waste by tests, and he does not propose to accept it. So
he inserts that reminder to be cut out, and it turns
when the reader is ready to act.
In mail order advertising the pictures are always to
the point. They are salesmen in themselves. They earn
the space they occupy. The size is gauged by their
importance. The picture of a dress one is trying to sell
may occupy much space. Less important things get
smaller spaces.
Pictures in ordinary advertising may teach little.
They probably result from whims. But pictures in mail
order advertising may form half the cost of selling.
And you may be sure that everything about them has
been decided by many comparative tests.
Before you use useless pictures, merely to decorate
or interest, look over some mail order ads. Mark what
their verdict is.
A man advertised an incubator to be sold by mail.
Type ads with right headlines brought excellent
returns. But he conceived the idea that a striking
picture would increase those returns. So he increased
his space 50 percent to add a row of chickens in
silhouette.
It did make a striking ad, but his cost per reply was
increased by exactly that 50 percent. The new ad,
Carl Galletti

- 22 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

costing one-half more for every insertion, brought not
one added sale.
The man learned that incubator buyers were
practical people. They were looking for attractive
offers, not for pictures.
Think of the countless untraced campaigns where a
whim of that kind costs half the advertising money
without a penny in return. And it may go on year after
year.
Mail order advertising tells a complete story if the
purpose is to make an immediate sale. You see no
limitations there on amount of copy.
The motto there is, "The more you tell the more you
sell." And it has never failed to prove out so in any test
we know.
Sometimes the advertiser uses small ads,
sometimes large ads. None are too small to tell a
reasonable story. But an ad twice larger brings twice
the returns. A four-times-larger ad brings four times
the returns, and usually some in addition.
But this occurs only when the larger space is
utilized as well as the small space. Set half-page copy
in a page space and you double the cost of returns. We
have seen many a test prove that.

Carl Galletti

- 23 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Look at an ad of the Mead Cycle Company - a typical
mail order ad. These have been running for many
years. The ads are unchanging. Mr. Mead told the
writer that not for $10,000 would he change a single
word in his ads.
For many years he compared one ad with another.
And the ads you see today are the final result of all
those experiments. Note the picture he uses, the
headlines, the economy of space, the small type. Those
ads are as near perfect for their purpose as an ad can
be.
So with any other mail order ad which has long
continued. Every feature, every word and picture
teaches advertising at its best. You may not like them.
You may say they are unattractive, crowded, hard to
read – anything you will. But the test of results has
proved those ads the best salesmen those lines have
yet discovered. And they certainly pay.
Mail order advertising is the court of least resort.
You may get the same instruction, if you will, by
keying other ads. But mail order ads are models. They
are selling goods profitably in a difficult way. It is far
harder to get mail orders than to send buyers to the
stores. It is hard to sell goods which can't be seen. Ads
which do that are excellent examples of what
advertising should be.
Carl Galletti

- 24 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

We cannot often follow all the principles of mail
order advertising, though we know we should. The
advertiser forces a compromise. Perhaps pride in our
ads has an influence. But every departure from those
principles adds to our selling cost. Therefore it is
always a question of what we are willing to pay for our
frivolities.
We can at least know what we pay. We can make
keyed comparisons, one ad with another. Whenever
we do we invariably find that the nearer we get to
proved mail order copy the more customers we get for
our money.
This is another important chapter. Think it over.
What real difference is there between inducing a
customer to order by mail or order from his dealer?
Why should the methods of salesmanship differ?
They should not. When they do, it is for one of two
reasons. Either the advertiser does not know what the
mail order advertiser knows. He is advertising blindly.
Or he is deliberately sacrificing a percentage of his
returns to gratify some desire.
There is some apology for that, just as there is for
fine offices and buildings. Most of us can afford to do
something for pride and opinion. But let us know what
we are doing. Let us know the cost of our pride. Then,
if our advertising fails to bring the wanted returns, let
Carl Galletti

- 25 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

us go back to our model – a good mail order ad – and
eliminate some of our waste.

Carl Galletti

- 26 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 5
Headlines
The difference between advertising and personal
salesmanship lies largely in personal contact. The
salesman is there to demand attention. He cannot well
be ignored. The advertisement can be ignored.
But the salesman wastes much of his time on
prospects whom he never can hope to interest. He
cannot pick them out. The advertisement is read only
by interested people who, by their own volition, study
what we have to say.
The purpose of a headline is to pick out people you
can interest. You wish to talk to someone in a crowd.
So the first thing you say is, "Hey there, Bill Jones" to
get the right person’s attention.
So it is in an advertisement. What you have will
interest certain people only, and for certain reasons.
You care only for those people. Then create a headline
which will hail those people only.
Carl Galletti

- 27 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Perhaps a blind headline or some clever conceit will
attract many times as many. But they may consist of
mostly impossible subjects for what you have to offer.
And the people you are after may never realize that
the ad refers to something they may want.
Headlines on ads are like headlines on news items.
Nobody reads a whole newspaper. One is interested in
financial news, one in political, one in society, one in
cookery, one in sports, etc. There are whole pages in
any newspaper which we never scan at all. Yet other
people may turn directly to those pages.
We pick out what we wish to read by headlines, and
we don't want those headlines misleading. The writing
of headlines is one of the greatest journalistic arts.
They either conceal or reveal an interest.
Suppose a newspaper article stated that a certain
woman was the most beautiful in the city. That article
would be of intense interest to that woman and her
friends. But neither she nor her friends would ever
read it if the headline was "Egyptian Psychology."
So in advertising. It is commonly said that people do
not read advertisements. That is silly, of course. We
who spend millions in advertising and watch the
returns marvel at the readers we get. Again and again
we see 20 percent of all the readers of a newspaper
cut out a certain coupon.
Carl Galletti

- 28 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

But people do not read ads for amusement. They
don't read ads which, at a glance, seem to offer nothing
interesting. A double-page ad on women's dresses will
not gain a glance from a man. Nor will a shaving cream
ad from a woman.
Always bear these facts in mind. People are hurried.
The average person worth cultivating has too much to
read. They skip three-fourths of the reading matter
which they pay to get. They are not going to read your
business talk unless you make it worth their while and
let the headline show it.
People will not be bored in print. They may listen
politely at a dinner table to boasts and personalities,
life histories, etc. But in print they choose their own
companions, their own subjects. They want to be
amused or benefited. They want economy, beauty,
labor saving, good things to eat and wear. There may
be products which interest them more than anything
else in the magazine. But they will never know it
unless the headline or the picture tells them.
The writer of this chapter spends far more time on
headlines than on writing. He often spends hours on a
single headline. Often scores of headlines are
discarded before the right one is selected. For the
entire return from an ad depends on attracting the

Carl Galletti

- 29 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

right sort of readers. The best of salesmanship has no
chance whatever unless we get a hearing.
The vast difference in headlines is shown by keyed
returns which this book advocates. The identical ad
run with various headlines differs tremendously in its
returns. It is not uncommon for a change in headlines
to multiply returns from five to ten times over.
So we compare headlines until we know what sort
of appeal pays best. That differs in every line, of
course.
The writer has before him keyed returns on nearly
two thousand headlines used on a single product. The
story in these ads is nearly identical. But the returns
vary enormously, due to the headlines. So with every
keyed return in our record appears the headline that
we used.
Thus we learn what type of headline has the most
widespread appeal. The product has many uses. It
fosters beauty. It prevents disease. It aides daintiness
and cleanliness. We learn to exactness which quality
most of our readers seek.
This does not mean we neglect the others. One sort
of appeal may bring half the returns of another, yet be
important enough to be profitable. We overlook no
field that pays. But we know what proportion of our
ads should, in the headline, attract any certain class.
Carl Galletti

- 30 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

For this same reason we employ a vast variety of
ads. If we are using twenty magazines we may use
twenty separate ads. This because circulations
overlap, and because a considerable percentage of
people are attracted by each of several forms of
approach. We wish to reach them all.
On a soap, for instance, the headline "Keep Clean"
might attract a very small percentage. It is too
commonplace. So might the headline, "No animal fats."
People may not care much about that. The headline, "It
floats" might prove interesting. But a headline
referring to beauty or complexion might attract many
times as many.
An automobile ad might refer in the headline to a
good universal joint. It might fall flat, because so few
buyers think of universal joints. The same ad with a
headline, "The Sportiest of Sport Bodies," might
outpull the other fifty to one.
This is enough to suggest the importance of
headlines. Anyone who keys ads will be amazed at the
difference. The appeals we like best will rarely prove
best, because we do not know enough people to
average up their desires. So we learn on each line by
experiment.
But back of all lie fixed principles. You are
presenting an ad to millions. Among them is a
Carl Galletti

- 31 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

percentage, small or large, whom you hope to interest.
Go after that percentage and try to strike the chord
that responds. If you are advertising corsets, men and
children don't interest you. If you are advertising
cigars, you have no use for non-smokers. Razors won't
attract women, rouge will not interest men.
Don't think that those millions will read your ads to
find out if your product interests. They will decide at a
glance – by your headline or your pictures. Address
the people you seek, and them only.

Carl Galletti

- 32 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 6
Psychology
The competent advertising man must understand
psychology. The more he knows about it the better. He
must learn that certain effects lead to certain
reactions, and use that knowledge to increase results
and avoid mistakes.
Human nature is perpetual. In most respects it is the
same today as in the time of Caesar. So the principles
of psychology are fixed and enduring. You will never
need to unlearn what you learn about them.
We learn, for instance, that curiosity is one of the
strongest of human incentives. We employ it
whenever we can. Puffed Wheat and Puffed Rice were
made successful largely through curiosity. "Grains
puffed to 8 times the normal size." "Foods shot from
guns." "125 million steam explosions caused in every
kernel." These foods were failures before that factor
was discovered.
Carl Galletti

- 33 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

We learn that cheapness is not a strong appeal.
Americans are extravagant. They want bargains but
not cheapness. They want to feel that they can afford
to eat and have and wear the best. Treat them as
though they could not and they resent your attitude.
We learn that people judge largely by price. They
are not experts. In the British National Gallery is a
painting which is announced in a catalog to have cost
$750,000. Most people at first pass it by at a glance.
Then later they get farther on in the catalog and learn
what the painting cost. They return then and surround
it.
A department store advertised at one Easter time a
$1,000 hat, and the floor could not hold the women
who came to see it.
We often employ this factor in psychology. Perhaps
we are advertising a valuable formula. To merely say
that would not be impressive. So we state – as a fact –
that we paid $100,000 for that formula. That
statement when tried has won a wealth of respect.
Many articles are sold under guarantee – so
commonly sold that guarantees have ceased to be
impressive. But one concern made a fortune by
offering a dealer’s signed warrant. The dealer to whom
one paid his money agreed in writing to pay it back if
asked. Instead of a far-away stranger, a neighbor gave
Carl Galletti

- 34 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

the warrant. The results have led many to try that
plan, and it has always proved effective.
Many have advertised, "Try it for a week. If you
don't like it we'll return your money.” Then someone
conceived the idea of sending goods without any
money down, and saying, "Pay in a week if you like
them." That proved many times as impressive.
One great advertising man stated the difference this
way: "Two men came to me, each offering me a horse.
Both made equal claims. They were good horses, kind
and gentle. A child could drive them. One man said,
‘Try the horse for a week. If my claims are not true,
come back for your money.’ The other man also said,
‘Try the horse for a week.’ But he added, ‘Come and
pay me then.’ I naturally bought the second man’s
horse."
Now countless things – cigars, typewriters, washing
machines, books, etc. - are sent out in this way on
approval. And we find that people are honest. The
losses are very small.
An advertiser offered a set of books to business
men. The advertising was unprofitable, so he
consulted another expert. The ads were impressive.
The offer seemed attractive, "But," said the second
man, "let us add one little touch which I have found
effective. Let us offer to put the buyer’s name in gilt
Carl Galletti

- 35 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

lettering on each book." That was done, and with
scarcely another change in the ads they sold some
hundreds of thousands of books. Through some
peculiar kink in human psychology that name in gilt
gave much added value to the books.
Many send out small gifts, like memorandum books,
to customers and prospects. They get very small
results. One man sent out a letter to the effect that he
had a leather-covered book with a man’s name on it. It
was waiting for him and would be sent on request. The
form of request was enclosed, and it also asked for
certain information. That information indicated lines
on which a man might be sold.
Nearly all men, it was found, filled out that request
and supplied the information. When a man knows that
something belongs to him – something with his name
on – he will make the effort to get it, even though the
thing is a trifle.
In the same way it is found that an offer limited to a
certain class of people is far more effective than a
general offer. For instance, an offer limited to veterans
of the war. Or to members of a lodge or sect. Or to
executives. Those who are entitled to any seeming
advantage will go a long way not to lose that
advantage.

Carl Galletti

- 36 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

An advertiser suffered much from substitution. He
said, "Look out for substitutes," "Be sure you get this
brand," etc., with no effect. Those were selfish appeals.
Then he said, "Try our rivals too" – said it in his
headlines. He invited comparisons and showed that he
did not fear them. That corrected the situation. Buyers
were careful to get the brand so conspicuously
superior that its maker could court a trial of the rest.
Two advertisers offered food products nearly
identical. Both offered a full-size package as an
introduction. But one gave his package free. The other
bought the package. A coupon was good at any store
for a package, for which the maker paid retail price.
The first advertiser failed and the second
succeeded. The first even lost a large part of the trade
he had. He cheapened his product by giving a 15-cent
package away. It is hard to pay for an article which has
once been free. It is like paying railroad fare after
traveling on a pass.
The other gained added respect for his article by
paying retail price to let the user try it. An article good
enough for the maker to buy is good enough for the
user to buy. It is vastly different to pay 15 cents to let
you try an article than to simply say "It's free."
So with sampling. Hand an unwanted product to a
housewife and she pays it slight respect. She is no
Carl Galletti

- 37 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

mood to see its virtues. But get her to ask for a sample
after reading your story, and she is in a very different
position. She knows your claims. She is interested in
them, else she would not act. And she expects to find
the qualities you told.
There is a great deal in mental impression. Submit
five articles exactly alike and five people may choose
one of them. But point out in one some qualities to
notice and everyone will find them. The five people
then will all choose the same article.
If people can be made sick or well by mental
impressions, they can be made to favor a certain brand
in that way. And that, on some lines, is the only way to
win them.
Two concerns, side by side, sold women's clothing
on installments. The appeal, of course, was to poor
girls who desired to dress better. One treated them
like poor girls and made the bare business offer.
The other put a woman in charge – a motherly,
dignified, capable woman. They did business in her
name. They used her picture. She signed all ads and
letters. She wrote to these girls like a friend. She knew
herself what it meant to a girl not to be able to dress
her best. She had long sought a chance to supply
women good clothes and give them all season to pay.
Carl Galletti

- 38 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Now she was able to do so, with the aid of men behind
her.
There was no comparison in those two appeals. It
was not long before this woman’s long-established
next-door rival had to quit.
The backers of this business sold housefurnishings
on installments. Sending out catalogs promiscuously
did not pay. Offering long-time credit often seems like
a reflection.
But when a married woman bought garments from
Mrs. ____, and paid as agreed, they wrote to her
something like this: "Mrs. ____, whom we know, tells us
that you are one of her good customers. She has dealt
with you, she says, and you do just as you agree. So we
have opened with you a credit account on our books,
good any time you wish. When you want anything in
furnishings, just order it. Pay nothing in advance. We
are very glad to send it without any investigation to a
person recommended as you are.”
That was flattering. Naturally those people, when
they wanted some furniture, would order from that
house.
There are endless phases to psychology. Some
people know them by instinct. Many of them are
taught by experience. But we learn most of them from
Carl Galletti

- 39 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

others. When we see one winning method we note it
down for use when occasion offers.
These things are very important. An identical offer
made in a different way may bring multiplied returns.
Somewhere in the mines of business experience we
must find the best method somehow.

Carl Galletti

- 40 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 7
Being Specific
Platitudes and generalities roll off the human
understanding like water from a duck. They leave no
impression whatever. To say, "Best in the world,"
"Lowest prices in existence," etc. are at best simply
claiming the expected. But superlatives of that sort are
usually damaging. They suggest looseness of
expression, a tendency to exaggerate, a carelessness
truth. They lead readers to discount all the statements
that you make.
People recognize a certain license in selling talk as
they do poetry. A man may say, "Supreme in quality"
without seeming a liar, though one may know that the
other brands are equally as good. One expects a
salesman to put his best foot forward and excuses
some exaggeration born of enthusiasm. But just for
that reason general statements count for little. And a

Carl Galletti

- 41 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

man inclined to superlatives must expect that his
every statement will be taken with some caution.
But a man who makes a specific claim is either
telling the truth or a lie. People do not expect an
advertiser to lie. They know that he can't lie in the best
mediums. The growing respect in advertising has
largely come through a growing regard for its truth.
So a definite statement is usually accepted. Actual
figures are not generally discounted. Specific facts,
when stated, have their full weight and effect.
This is very important to consider in written or
personal salesmanship. The weight of an argument
may often be multiplied by making it specific. Say that
a tungsten lamp gives more light than a carbon and
you leave some doubt. Say it gives three and one-third
times the light and people realize that you have made
tests and comparisons.
A dealer may say, "Our prices have been reduced"
without creating any marked impression. But when he
says "Our prices have been reduced 25 percent" he
gets the full value of his announcement.
A mail order advertiser sold women's clothing to
people of the poorer classes. For years he used the
slogan, "Lowest prices in America." His rivals all
copied that. Then he guaranteed to undersell any other
dealer. His rivals did likewise. Soon those claims
Carl Galletti

- 42 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

became common to every advertiser in his line, and
they became commonplace.
Then under able advice, he changed his statement to
"Our net profit is 3 percent." That was a definite
statement and it proved very impressive. With their
volume of business it was evident that their prices
must be minimum. No one could be expected to do
business on less than 3 percent. The next year their
business made a sensational increase.
At one time in the automobile business there was a
general impression that profits were excessive. One
well-advised advertiser came out with the statement,
"Our profit is 9 percent." Then he cited actual costs on
the hidden costs of a $1,500 car. They amounted to
$735, without including anything one could easily see.
This advertiser made a great success along those lines
at that time.
Shaving soaps have long been advertised "Abundant
lather," "Does not dry on the face," "Acts quickly," etc.
One advertiser had as good a chance as another to
impress those claims.
Then a new maker came into the field. It was a
tremendously difficult field, for every customer had to
be taken from someone else. He stated specific facts.
He said, “Multiplies itself in lather 250 times.” "Softens
the beard in one minute." "Maintains its creamy
Carl Galletti

- 43 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

fullness for ten minutes on the face." "The final result
of testing and comparing 130 formulas." Perhaps
never in advertising has there been a quicker and
greater success in an equally difficult field.
Makers of safety razors have long advertised quick
shaves. One maker advertised a 78-second shave. That
was definite. It indicated actual tests. That man at once
made a sensational advance in his sales.
In the old days all beers were advertised as "Pure."
The claim made no impression. The bigger the type
used, the bigger the folly. After millions had been
spent to impress a platitude, one brewer pictured a
plate glass room where beer was cooled in filtered air.
He pictured a filter of white wood pulp through which
every drop was cleared. He told how bottles were
washed four times by machinery. How he went down
4,000 feet for pure water. How 1,018 experiments had
been made to attain a yeast to give beer that matchless
flavor. And how all the yeast was forever made from
that adopted mother cell.
All claims were such as any brewer might have
made. They were mere essentials in ordinary brewing.
But he was the first to tell the people about them,
while others cried merely "pure beer." He made the
greatest success that was ever made in beer
advertising.
Carl Galletti

- 44 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

"Used the world over" is a very elastic claim. Then
one advertiser said, "Used by the peoples of 52
nations," and many another has followed.
One statement may take as much room as another,
yet a definite statement be many times as effective.
The difference is vast. If a claim is worth making, make
it in the most impressive way.
All these effects must be studied. Salesmanship-inprint is very expensive. Every word you use may cost
$10 to insert. A salesman's loose talk matters little. But
when you are talking to millions at enormous cost, the
weight of your claims is important.
No generality has any weight whatever. It is like
saying "How do you do?" When you have no intention
of inquiring about one’s health. But specific claims
when made in print are taken at their value.

Carl Galletti

- 45 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 8
Tell Your Full Story
Whatever claim you use to gain attention, the
advertisement should tell a story reasonably complete.
If you watch returns, you will find that certain claims
appeal far more than others. But in usual lines a
number of claims appeal to a large percentage. Then
present those claims in every ad for their effect on that
percentage.
Some advertisers, for the sake of brevity, present
one claim at a time. Or they write a serial ad,
continued in another issue. There is no greater folly.
Those serials almost never connect.
When you once get a person’s attention, then is the
time to accomplish all you can ever hope with him.
Bring all your good arguments to bear. Cover every
phase of your subject. One fact appeals to some, one to
another. Omit any one and a certain percentage will
lose the fact which might convince.
Carl Galletti

- 46 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

People are not apt to read successive
advertisements on any single line. No more than you
read a news item twice, or a story. In one reading of an
advertisement one decides for or against a
proposition. And that operates against a second
reading. So present to the reader, when once you get
him, every important claim you have.
The best advertisers do that. They learn their
appealing claims by tests – by comparing results from
various headlines. Gradually they accumulate a list of
claims important enough to use. All those claims
appear in every ad thereafter.
The advertisements seem monotonous to the men
who read them all. A complete story is always the
same. But one must consider that the average reader is
only once a reader, probably. And what you fail to tell
him in that ad is something he may never know.
Some advertisers go so far as to never change their
ads. Single mail order ads often run year after year
without diminishing returns. So with some general
ads. They are perfected ads, embodying in the best
way known all that one has to say. Advertisers do not
expect a second reading. Their constant returns come
from getting new readers.
In every ad consider only new customers. People
using your product are not going to read your ads.
Carl Galletti

- 47 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

They have already read and decided. You might
advertise month after month to present users that the
product they use is poison, and they would never
know it. So never waste one line of your space to say
something to present users, unless you can say it in
headlines. Bear in mind always that you can address
an unconverted prospect.
Any reader of your ad is interested, else he would
not be a reader. You are dealing with someone willing
to listen. Then do your level best. That reader, if you
lose him now, may never again be a reader.
You are like a salesman in a busy man’s office. He
may have tried again and again to get entree. He may
never be admitted again. This is his one chance to get
action, and he must employ it to the full.
This again brings up the question of brevity. The
most common expression you hear about advertising
is that people will not read much. Yet a vast amount of
the best-paying advertising shows that people do read
much. Then they write for a book, perhaps – for added
information.
There is no fixed rule on this subject of brevity. One
sentence may tell a complete story on a line like
chewing gum. It may on an article like Cream of Wheat.
But, whether long or short, an advertising story should
be reasonably complete.
Carl Galletti

- 48 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

A certain man desired a personal car. He cared little
about the price. He wanted a car to take pride in, else
he felt he would never drive it. But, being a good
business man, he wanted value for his money.
His inclination was towards a Rolls-Royce. He also
considered a Pierce-Arrow, a Locomobile and others.
But these famous cars offered no information. Their
advertisements were very short. Evidently the makers
considered it undignified to argue comparative merits.
The Marmon, on the contrary, told a complete story.
He read columns and books about it. So he bought a
Marmon, and was never sorry. But he afterwards
learned facts about another car at nearly three times
the price which would have sold him that car had he
known them.
What folly it is to cry a name in a line like that, plus
a few brief generalities. A car may be a lifetime
investment. It involves an important expenditure. A
man interested enough to buy a car will read a volume
about it if the volume is interesting.
So with everything. You may be simply trying to
change a woman from one breakfast food to another,
or one tooth paste, or one soap. She is wedded to what
she is using. Perhaps she has used it for years.
You have a hard proposition. If you do not believe it,
go to her in person and try to make the change. Not to
Carl Galletti

- 49 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

merely buy a first package to please you, but to adopt
your brand. A man who once does that at a woman’s
door won't argue for brief advertisements. He will
never again say, "A sentence will do," or a name or a
claim or a boast.
Nor will the man who traces his results. Note that
brief ads are never keyed. Note that every traced ad
tells a complete story, though it takes columns to tell.
Never be guided in any way by ads which are
untraced. Never do anything because some
uninformed advertiser considers that something right.
Never be led in new paths by the blind. Apply to your
advertising ordinary common sense. Take the opinion
of nobody, the verdict of nobody, who knows nothing
about his returns.

Carl Galletti

- 50 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 9
Art In Advertising
Pictures in advertising are very expensive. Not in
the cost of good art work alone, but in the cost of
space. From one-third to one-half of an advertising
campaign is often staked on the power of the pictures.
Anything expensive must be effective, else it
involves much waste. So art in advertising is a study of
paramount importance.
Pictures should not be used merely because they
are interesting. Or to attract attention. Or to decorate
an ad. We have covered these points elsewhere. Ads
are not written to interest, please or amuse. You are
not writing to please the hoi-polloi. You are writing on
a serious subject – the subject of money-spending. And
you address a restricted minority.
Use pictures only to attract those who may profit
you. Use them only when they form a better selling
argument than the same amount of space set in type.
Carl Galletti

- 51 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Mail order advertisers, as we have said, have
pictures down to a science. Some use large pictures,
some use small, some omit pictures entirely. A
noticeable fact is that none of them uses expensive art
work. Be sure that all these things are done for
reasons made apparent by results.
Any other advertiser should apply the same
principles. Or, if none exist which apply to his line, he
should work out his own by tests. It is certainly unwise
to spend large sums on a dubious adventure.
Pictures in many lines form a major factor. Omitting
the lines where the article itself should be pictured. In
some lines, like Arrow Collars and most in clothing
advertising, pictures have proved most convincing.
Not only in picturing the collar or the clothes, but in
picturing men whom others envy, in surroundings
which others covet. The pictures subtly suggest that
these articles of apparel will aid men to those desired
positions.
So with correspondence schools. Theirs is traced
advertising. Picturing men in high positions or taking
upward steps forms a very convincing argument.
So with beauty articles. Picturing beautiful women,
admired and attractive, is a supreme inducement. But
there is a great advantage in including a fascinated
man. Women desire beauty largely because of men.
Carl Galletti

- 52 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Then show them using their beauty, as women do use
it, to gain maximum effect.
Advertising pictures should not be eccentric. Don't
treat your subject lightly. Don't lessen respect for
yourself or your article by any attempt at frivolity.
People do not patronize a clown. There are two things
about which men should never joke. One is business,
one is home.
An eccentric picture may do you serious damage.
One may gain attention by wearing a fool’s cap. But he
would ruin his selling prospects.
Then a picture which is eccentric or unique takes
attention from your subject. You cannot afford to do
that. Your main appeal lies in your headline. Overshadow that and you kill it. Don't, to gain general and
useless attention, sacrifice the attention that you want.
Don't be like a salesman who wears conspicuous
clothes. The small percentage he appeals to are not
usually good buyers. The great majority of the sane
and thrifty heartily despise him. Be normal in
everything you do when you are seeking confidence
and conviction.
Generalities cannot be applied to art. There are
seeming exceptions to most statements. Each line
must be studied by itself.
Carl Galletti

- 53 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

But the picture must help sell the goods. It should
help more than anything else could do in like space,
else use that something else.
Many pictures tell a story better than type can do. In
the advertising of Puffed Grains the pictures of the
grains were found to be most effective. They awake
curiosity. No figure drawings in that case compare in
results with these grains.
Other pictures form a total loss. We have cited cases
of that kind. The only way to know, as is with most
other questions, is by compared results.
There are disputed questions in art work which we
will cite without expressing opinions. They seem to be
answered both ways, according to the line which is
advertised.
Does it pay better to use fine art work or ordinary?
Some advertisers pay up to $2,000 per drawing. They
figure that the space is expensive. The art cost is small
in comparison. So they consider the best worth its
cost.
Others argue that few people have art education.
The art judges form a percentage too small to
consider. They bring out their ideas, and bring them
out well, at a fraction of the cost. Mail order
advertisers are generally in this class.
Carl Galletti

- 54 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

The question is one of small moment. Certainly
good art pays as well as mediocre. And the cost of
preparing ads is very small compared with the cost of
insertion.
Should every ad have a new picture? Or may a
picture be repeated? Both viewpoints have many
supporters. The probability is that repetition is an
economy. We are after new customers always. It is not
probably that they remember a picture we have used
before. If they do, repetition does not detract.
Do color pictures pay better than black and white?
Not generally, according to the evidence we have
gathered to date. Yet there are exceptions. Certain
food dishes look far better in colors. Tests on lines like
oranges, desserts, etc. show that color pays. Color
comes close to placing the products on actual
exhibition.
But color used to amuse or to gain attention is like
anything else that we use for that purpose. It may
attract many times as many people, yet not secure a
hearing from as many whom we want.
The general rule applies. Do nothing to merely
interest, amuse, or attract. That is not your province.
Do only that which wins the people you are after in the
cheapest possible way.
Carl Galletti

- 55 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

But these are minor questions. They are mere
economies, not largely affecting the results of a
campaign.
Some things you do may cut all your results in two.
Other things can be done which multiply those results.
Minor costs are insignificant when compared with
basic principles. One man may do business in a shed,
another in a palace. That is immaterial. The great
question is, one’s power to get the maximum results.

Carl Galletti

- 56 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 10
Things Too Costly
Many things are possible in advertising which are
too costly to attempt. That is another reason why
every project and method should be weighed and
determined by a known scale of cost and result.
Changing people’s habits is very expensive. A
project which involves that must be seriously
considered. To sell shaving soap to the peasants of
Russia one would first need to change their beardwearing habits. The cost would be excessive. Yet
countless advertisers try to do things almost as
impossible. Just because questions are not ably
considered, and results are untraced and unknown.
For instance, the advertiser of a dentifrice may
spend much space and money to educate people to
brush their teeth. Tests which we know of have
indicated that the cost of such converts may run from
$20 to $25 each. Not only because of the difficulty, but
Carl Galletti

- 57 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

because much of the advertising goes to people
already converted.
Such a cost, of course, is unthinkable. One might not
in a lifetime get it back in sales. The maker who
learned these facts by tests makes no attempt to
educate people to the tooth brush habit. What cannot
be done on a large scale profitably cannot be done on a
small scale. So not one line in any ad is devoted to this
object. This maker, who is constantly guided in
everything by keying every ad, has made remarkable
success.
Another dentifrice maker spends much money to
make converts to the tooth brush. The object is
commendable, but altruistic. The new business he
creates is shared by his rivals. He is wondering why
his sales increase is in no way commensurate with his
expenditure.
An advertiser at one time spent much money to
educate people to the use of oatmeal. The results were
too small to discover. All people know of oatmeal. As a
food for children it has age-old fame. Doctors have
advised it for many generations. People who don't
serve oatmeal are therefore difficult to start. Perhaps
their objections are insurmountable. Anyway, the cost
proved to be beyond all possible return.

Carl Galletti

- 58 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

There are many advertisers who know facts like
these and concede them. They would not think of
devoting a whole campaign to any such impossible
object. Yet they devote a share of their space to that
object. That is only the same folly on a smaller scale. It
is not good business.
No one orange grower or raisin grower could
attempt to increase the consumption of those fruits.
The cost might be a thousand times his share of the
returns. But thousands of growers combined have
done it on those and many other lines. There lies one
of the great possibilities of advertising development.
The general consumption of scores of foods can be
profitably increased. But it must be done through wide
co-operation.
No advertiser could afford to educate people on
vitamins or germicides. Such things are done by
authorities, through countless columns of unpaid-for
space. But great successes have been made by going to
people already educated and satisfying their created
wants.
It is a very shrewd thing to watch the development
of a popular trend, the creation of new desires. Then at
the right time offer to satisfy those desires. That was
done on yeasts, for instance, and on numerous
antiseptics. It can every year be done on new things
Carl Galletti

- 59 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

which some popular fashion or widespread influence
is bringing into vogue. But it is a very different thing to
create that fashion, taste or influence for all in your
field to share.
There are some things we know of which might
possibly be sold to half the homes in the country. A
Dakin-fluid germicide, for instance. But the
consumption would be very small. A small bottle
might last for years. Customers might cost $1.50 each.
And the revenue per customer might not in ten years
repay the cost of getting.
Mail order sales on single articles, however popular,
rarely cost less that $2.50 each. It is reasonable to
suppose that sales made through dealers on like
articles will cost approximately as much. Those facts
must be considered on any one-sale article. Possibly
one user will win others. But traced returns as in mail
order advertising would prohibit much advertising
which is now being done.
Costly mistakes are made by blindly following some
ill-conceived idea. An article, for instance, may have
many uses, one of which is to prevent disease.
Prevention is not a popular subject, however much it
should be. People will do much to cure trouble, but
people in general will do little to prevent it. This has
been proved my many disappointments.
Carl Galletti

- 60 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

One may spend much money in arguing prevention
when the same money spent on another claim would
bring many times the sales. A heading which asserts
one claim may bring ten times the results of a heading
which asserts another. An advertiser may go far astray
unless he finds out.
A tooth paste may tend to prevent decay. It may also
beautify teeth. Tests will probably show that the latter
appeal is many times as strong as the former. The
most successful tooth paste advertiser never features
tooth troubles in his headlines. Tests have proved
them unappealing. Other advertisers in this line center
on those troubles. That is often because results are not
known and compared.
A soap may tend to cure eczema. It may at the same
time improve the complexion. The eczema claim may
appeal to one in a hundred while the beauty claims
would appeal to nearly all. To even mention the
eczema claims might destroy the beauty claim.
A man has a relief for asthma. It has done so much
for him he considers it a great advertising possibility.
We have no statistics on this subject. We do not know
the percentage of people who suffer from asthma. A
canvass might show it to be one in a hundred. If so, he
would need to cover a hundred useless readers to
reach one he wants. His cost of result might be twenty
Carl Galletti

- 61 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

times as high as on another article which appeals to
one in five. That excessive cost would probably mean
disaster. For reasons like these every new advertiser
should seek for wise advice. No one with the interests
of advertising at heart will advise any dubious
venture.
Some claims not popular enough to feature in the
main are still popular enough to consider. They
influence a certain number of people – say one-fourth
of your possible customers. Such a claim may be
featured to advantage in a certain percentage of
headlines. It should probably be included in every
advertisement. But those are not things to guess at.
They should be decided by actual knowledge, usually
by traced returns.
This chapter, like every chapter, points out a very
important reason for knowing your results. Scientific
advertising is impossible without that. So is safe
advertising. So is maximum profit.
Groping in the dark in this field has probably cost
enough money to pay the national debt. That is what
has filled the advertising graveyards. That is what has
discouraged thousands who could profit in this field.
And the dawn of knowledge is what is bringing a new
day in the advertising world.

Carl Galletti

- 62 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 11
Information
An ad-writer, to have a chance at success, must gain
full information on his subject. The library of an
advertising agency should have books on every line
that calls for research. A painstaking advertising man
will often read for weeks on some problem which
comes up.
Perhaps in many volumes he will find few facts to
use. But some one fact may be the keystone of success.
This writer has just completed an enormous
amount of reading, medical and otherwise, on coffee.
This is to advertise a coffee without caffeine. One
scientific article out of a thousand perused gave the
keynote for that campaign. It was the fact that caffeine
stimulation comes two hours after drinking. So the
immediate bracing effects which people seek from
coffee do not come from the caffeine. Removing
Carl Galletti

- 63 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

caffeine does not remove the kick. It does not modify
coffee’s delights, for caffeine is tasteless and odorless.
Caffeineless coffee has been advertised for years.
People regarded it like near-beer. Only through weeks
of reading did we find a way to put it in another light.
To advertise a tooth paste this writer has also read
many volumes of scientific matter dry as dust. But in
the middle of one volume he found the idea which has
helped make millions for that tooth paste maker. And
has made this campaign one of the sensations of
advertising.
Genius is the art of taking pains. The advertising
man who spares the midnight oil will never get very
far.
Before advertising a food product, 130 men were
employed for weeks to interview all classes of
consumers.
On another line, letters were sent to 12,000
physicians. Questionnaires are often mailed to tens of
thousands of men and women to get the viewpoint of
consumers.
A $25,000-a-year man, before advertising outfits for
acetylene gas, spent weeks in going from farm to farm.
Another man did that on a tractor.

Carl Galletti

- 64 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Before advertising a shaving cream, one thousand
men were asked to state what they most desired in a
shaving soap.
Called on to advertise pork and beans, a canvass
was made of some thousands of homes. Theretofore
all pork and bean advertising has been based on "Buy
my brand." That canvass showed that only 4 percent of
the people used any canned pork and beans. Ninetysix percent baked their beans at home.
The problem was not to sell a particular brand. Any
such attempt appealed to only four percent. The right
appeal was to win the people away from home-baked
beans. The advertising, which without that knowledge
must have failed, proved a great success.
A canvas is made, not only of homes, but of dealers.
Competition is measured up.
Every advertiser of a similar product is written for
his literature and claims. Thus we start with exact
information on all that our rivals are doing.
Clipping bureaus are patronized, so that everything
printed on our subject comes to the man who writes
ads.
Every comment which comes from consumers or
dealers goes to this man’s desk.

Carl Galletti

- 65 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

It is often necessary in a line to learn the total
expenditure. We must learn what a user spends a year,
else we shall not know if users are worth the cost of
getting.
We must learn the total consumption, else we may
overspend.
We must learn the percentage of readers to whom
our product appeals. We must often gather this data
on classes. The percentage may differ on farms and in
cities. The cost of advertising largely depends on the
percentage of waste circulation.
Thus an advertising campaign is usually preceded
by a very large volume of data. Even an experimental
campaign, for effective experiments cost a great deal
of work and time.
Often chemists are employed to prove or disprove
doubtful claims. An advertiser, in all good faith, makes
an impressive assertion. If it is true, it will form a big
factor in advertising. If untrue, it may prove a
boomerang. And it may bar our ads from good
mediums. It is remarkable how often a maker proves
wrong on assertions he had made for years.
Impressive claims are made far more impressive by
making them exact. So, many experiments are made to
get the actual figures. For instance, a certain drink is
known to have a large food value. That simple
Carl Galletti

- 66 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

assertion is not very convincing. So we send the drink
to the laboratory and find that its food value is 425
calories per pint. One pint is equal to six eggs in
calories of nutriment. That claim makes a great
impression.
In every line involving scientific details a censor is
appointed. The ad-writer, however well informed, may
draw wrong inferences from facts. So an authority
passes on every advertisement.
The uninformed would be staggered to know the
amount of work involved in a single ad. Weeks of work
sometimes. The ad seems so simple, and it must be
simple to appeal to simple people. But back of that ad
may lie reams of data, volumes of information, months
of research.
So this is no lazy mans field.

Carl Galletti

- 67 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 12
Strategy
Advertising is much like war, minus the venom. Or
much, if you prefer, like a game of chess. We are
usually out to capture others' citadels or garner
others' trade.
We must have skill and knowledge. We must have
training and experience, also right equipment. We
must have proper ammunition, and enough. We dare
not underestimate opponents. Our intelligence
department is a vital factor, as told in the previous
chapter. We need alliances with dealers, as another
chapter tells. We also need strategy of the ablest sort,
to multiply the value of our forces.
Sometimes in new campaigns comes the question of
a name. That may be most important. Often the right
name is an advertisement in itself. It may tell a fairly
complete story, like Shredded Wheat, Cream of Wheat,
Puffed Rice, Spearmint Gum, Palmolive Soap, etc.
Carl Galletti

- 68 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

That may be a great advantage. The name is usually
conspicuously displayed. Many a name has proved to
be the greatest factor in an article’s success. Other
names prove a distinct disadvantage – Toasted Corn
Flakes, for instance. Too many others may share a
demand with the man who builds it up.
Many coined names without meaning have
succeeded. Kodak, Karo, Mazda etc. are examples.
They are exclusive. The advertiser who gives them
meaning never needs to share his advantage. But a
significant name which helps to impress a dominant
claim is certainly a great advantage. Names which tell
stories have been worth millions of dollars. So a great
deal of research often precedes the selection of a
name.
Sometimes a price must be decided. A high price
creates resistance. It tends to limit one’s field. The cost
of getting an added profit may be more than the profit.
It is a well-known fact that the greatest profits are
made on great volume at small profit. Campbell's
Soups, Palmolive Soap, Karo Syrup and Ford cars are
conspicuous examples. A price which appeals only to –
say 10 percent – multiplies the cost of selling.
But on other lines high price is unimportant. High
profit is essential. The line may have a small sale per
customer. One hardly cares what he pays for a corn
Carl Galletti

- 69 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

remedy because he uses little. The maker must have a
large margin because of small consumption.
On other lines a higher price may even be an
inducement. Such lines are judged largely by price. A
product which costs more than the ordinary is
considered above the ordinary. So the price question is
always a very big factor in strategy.
Competition must be considered. What are the
forces against you? What have they in price or quality
or claims to weigh against your appeal? What have you
to win trade against them? What have you to hold
trade against them when you get it?
How strongly are your rivals entrenched? There are
some fields which are almost impregnable. They are
usually lines which created a new habit or custom and
which typify that custom with consumers. They so
dominate a field that one can hardly hope to invade it.
They have the volume, the profit to make a
tremendous fight.
Such fields are being constantly invaded. But it is
done through some convincing advantage, or through
very superior salesmanship-in-print.
Other lines are only less difficult. A new shaving
soap, as an example. About every possible customer is
using a rival soap. Most of them are satisfied with it.
Many are wedded to it. The appeal must be strong
Carl Galletti

- 70 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

enough to win those people from long-established
favor.
Such things are not accomplished by haphazard
efforts. Not by considering people in the mass and
making blind stabs for their favors. We must consider
individuals, typical people who are using rival brands.
A man on a Pullman, for instance, using his favorite
soap. What could you say to him in person to get him
to change to yours? We cannot go after thousands of
men until we learn how to win one.
The maker may say that he has no distinctions. He is
making a good product, but much like others. He
deserves a good share of the trade, but he has nothing
exclusive to offer. However, there is nearly always
something impressive which others have not told. We
must discover it. We must have a seeming advantage.
People don't quit habits without reason.
There is the problem of substitution and how to
head it off. That often steals much of one’s trade. This
must be considered in one’s original plan. One must
have the foresight to see all eventualities, and the
wisdom to establish his defenses in advance.
Many pioneers in the line establish large demands.
Then through some fault in their foundations, lose a
large share of the harvest. Theirs is a mere brand, for
Carl Galletti

- 71 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

instance, where it might have stood for an exclusive
product.
Vaseline is an example. That product established a
new demand, then almost monopolized that demand
through wisdom at the start. To have called it some
brand of petroleum jelly might have made a difference
of millions in results.
Jell-O, Postum, Victrola, Kodak, etc., established
coined names which came to typify a product. Some
such names have been admitted to the dictionary.
They have become common names, though coined and
exclusive.
Royal Baking Powder and Toasted Corn Flakes, on
the other hand, when they pioneered their fields, left
the way open to perpetual substitution. So did
Horlick’s Malted Milk.
The attitude of dealers must be considered. There is
a growing inclination to limit lines, to avoid duplicate
lines, to lesson inventories. If this applies to your line,
how will dealers receive it? If there is opposition, how
can we circumvent it?
The problems of distribution are important and
enormous. To advertise something that few dealers
supply is a waste of ammunition. Those problems will
be considered in a separate chapter.
Carl Galletti

- 72 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

These are samples of the problems which
advertising men must solve. These are some of the
reasons why vast experience is necessary. One
oversight may cost the client millions in the end. One
wrong piece of strategy may prohibit success. Things
done in one way may be twice as easy, half as costly, as
when done another way.
Advertising without this preparation is like a
waterfall going to waste. The power might be there,
but it is not made effective. We must center the force
and direct it in a practical direction.
Advertising often looks very simple. Thousands of
men claim ability to do it. And there is still a wide
impression that many men can. As a result, much
advertising goes by favor. But the men who know
realize that the problems are as many and as
important as the problems in building a skyscraper.
And many of them lie in the foundations.

Carl Galletti

- 73 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 13
Use Of Samples
The product itself should be its own best salesman.
Not the product alone, but the product plus a mental
impression, and atmosphere, which you place around
it. That being so, samples are of prime importance.
However expensive, they usually form the cheapest
selling method. A salesman might as well go out
without his sample case as an advertiser.
Sampling does not apply to little things alone, like
foods or proprietaries. It can be applied in some way
to almost anything. We have sampled clothing. We are
now sampling phonograph records.
Samples serve numerous valuable purposes. They
enable one to use the word "Free" in ads. That often
multiplies the readers. Most people want to learn
about any offered gift. Tests often show that samples
pay for themselves – perhaps several times over – in
Carl Galletti

- 74 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

multiplying the readers of your ads without additional
cost of space.
A sample gets action. The reader of your ad may not
be convinced to the point of buying. But he is ready to
learn more about the product that you offer. So he cuts
out a coupon, lays it aside, and later mails it or
presents it. Without that coupon he would soon forget.
Then you have the name and address of an interested
prospect. You can start him using your product. You
can give him fuller information. You can follow him up.
That reader might not again read one of your ads in
six months. Your impression would be lost. But when
he writes you, you have a chance to complete with that
prospect all that can be done. In that saving of waste
the sample pays for itself.
Sometimes a small sample is not a fair test. Then we
may send an order on the dealer for a full-size
package. Or we may make the coupon good for a
package at the store. Thus we get a longer test.
You say that is expensive. So is it expensive to gain a
prospect’s interest. It may cost you 50 cents to get the
person to the point of writing for a sample. Don't stop
at 15 cents additional to make that interest valuable.
Another way in which samples pay is by keying
your advertisements. They register the interest you
Carl Galletti

- 75 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

create. Thus you can compare one with another ad,
headline, plan and method.
That means in any line an enormous saving. The
wisest, most experienced man cannot tell what will
most appeal in any line of copy. Without a key to guide
you, your returns are very apt to cost you twice what
they need cost. And we know that some ads on the
same product will cost ten times what others cost. A
sample may pay for itself several times over by giving
you an accurate check.
Again samples enable you to refer customers where
they can be supplied. This is important before you
attain general distribution.
Many advertisers lose much by being penny-wise.
They are afraid of imposition, or they try to save
pennies. That is why they ask ten cents for a sample,
or a stamp or two. Getting that dime may cost them
from 40 cents to $1. That is, it may add that to the cost
of replies. But it is remarkable how many will pay that
addition rather than offer a sample free.
Putting a price on a sample greatly retards replies.
Then it prohibits you from using the word “Free” in
your ads. And that word "Free," as we have stated, will
generally more than pay for your samples.
For the same reason some advertisers say, "You buy
one package, we will buy the other." Or they make a
Carl Galletti

- 76 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

coupon good for part of the purchase price. Any keyed
returns will clearly prove that such offers do not pay.
Before a prospect is converted, it is approximately as
hard to get half price for your article as to get the full
price for it.
Bear in mind that you are the seller. You are the one
courting interest. Then don't make it difficult to
exhibit that interest. Don't ask your prospects to pay
for your selling efforts. Three in four will refuse to pay
- perhaps nine in ten.
Cost of requests for samples differ in every line. It
depends on your breadth of appeal. Some things
appeal to everybody, some to a small percentage. One
issue of the papers in Greater New York brought
1,460,000 requests for a can of evaporated milk. On a
chocolated drink, one-fifth the coupons published are
presented. Another line not widely used may bring a
fraction of that number.
But the cost of inquiries is usually enough to be
important. Then don't neglect them. Don't stint your
efforts with those you have half sold. An inquiry
means that a prospect has read your story and is
interested. He or she would like to try your product
and learn more about it. Do what you would do if that
prospect stood before you.

Carl Galletti

- 77 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Cost of inquiries depends largely on how they come.
Asking people to mail the coupon brings minimum
returns. Often four times as many will present that
coupon for a sample at the store. On a line before the
writer now, sample inquiries obtained by mail average
70 cents each. The same ads bring inquiries at from 18
cents to 22 cents each when the coupons are
presented at a local store.
Most people write few letters. Writing is an effort.
Perhaps they have no stamps in the house. Most
people will pay carfare to get a sample rather than two
cents postage. Therefore, it is always best, where
possible, to have samples delivered locally.
On one line three methods were offered. The
woman could write for a sample, or telephone, or call
at a store. Seventy percent of the inquiries came by
telephone. The use of the telephone is more common
and convenient than the use of stamps.
Sometimes it is not possible to supply all dealers
with samples. Then we refer people to some central
stores. These stores are glad to have many people
come there. And other dealers do not generally object
so long as they share in the sales.
It is important to have these dealers send you the
coupons promptly. Then you can follow up the
inquiries while their interest is fresh.
Carl Galletti

- 78 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

It is said that sample users repeat. They do to some
extent. But repeaters form a small percentage. Figure
it in your cost.
Say to the woman, "Only one sample to a home" and
few women will try to get more of them. And the few
who cheat you are not generally people who would
buy. So you are not losing purchasers, but the samples
only.
On numerous lines we have for long offered fullsized packages free. The packages were priced at from
10 cents to 50 cents each. In certain territories for a
time we have checked up on repeaters. And we found
the loss much less than the cost of checking.
In some lines samples would be wasted on children,
and they are most apt to get them. Then say in your
coupon "adults only." Children will not present such
coupons, and they will rarely mail them.
But one must be careful about publishing coupons
good for a full-size package at any store. Some people,
and even dealers, may buy up many papers. We do not
announce the date of such offers. And we insert them
in Sunday papers, not so easily bought up.
But we do not advocate samples given out
promiscuously. Samples distributed to homes, like
waifs on the doorsteps, probably never pay. Many of
them never reach the house or the housewife. When
Carl Galletti

- 79 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

they do, there is no prediction for them. The product is
cheapened. It is not introduced in a favorable way.
So with demonstrations in stores. There is always a
way to get the same results at a fraction of the cost.
Many advertisers do not understand this. They
supply thousands of samples to dealers to be handed
out as they will. Could a trace be placed on the cost of
returns, the advertiser would be stunned.
Give samples to interested people only. Give them
only to people who exhibit that interest by some effort.
Give them only to people to whom you have told your
story. First create an atmosphere of respect, a desire,
an expectation. When people are in that mood, your
sample will usually confirm the qualities you claim.
Here again comes the advantage of figuring cost per
customer. That is the only way to gauge advertising.
Samples sometimes seem to double advertising cost.
They often cost more than the advertising. Yet, rightly
used, they almost invariably form the cheapest way to
get customers. And that is what you want.
The arguments against samples are usually biased.
They may come from advertising agents who like to
see all the advertising money spent in print. Answer
such arguments by tests. Try some towns with them,
some without them. Where samples are effectively
Carl Galletti

- 80 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

employed, we rarely find a line where they do not
lessen the cost per customer.

Carl Galletti

- 81 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 14
Getting Distribution
Most advertisers are confronted with the problem
of getting distribution. National advertising is
unthinkable without that. A venture cannot be
profitable if nine in ten of the converts fail to find the
goods.
To force dealers to stock by bringing repeated
demands may be enormously expensive. To cover the
country with a selling force is usually impossible. To
get dealers to stock an unknown line on promise of
advertising is not easy. They have seen too many
efforts fail, too many promises rescinded.
We cannot discuss all plans for getting distribution.
There are scores of ways employed, according to the
enterprise. Some start by soliciting direct sales – mail
orders – until the volume of demand forces dealers to
supply.
Carl Galletti

- 82 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Some get into touch with prospects by a sample or
other offer, then refer them to certain dealers who are
stocked.
Some well-known makers can get a large
percentage of dealers to stock in advance under
guarantee of sale. Some consign goods to jobbers so
dealers can easily order. Some name certain dealers in
their ads until dealers in general stock.
The problems in this line are numberless. The
successful methods are many. But most of them apply
to lines too few to be worthy of discussion in a book
like this.
We shall deal here with articles of wide appeal and
repeated sales, like foods or proprietary articles.
We usually start with local advertising, even though
magazine advertising is best adapted to the article. We
get our distribution town by town, then change to
national advertising.
Sometimes we name the dealers who are stocked.
As others stock, we add their names. When a local
campaign is proposed, naming certain dealers, the
average dealer wants to be included. It is often
possible to get most of them by offering to name them
in the first few ads.

Carl Galletti

- 83 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Whether you advertise few or many dealers, the
others will stock in very short order if the advertising
is successful. Then the trade is referred to all dealers.
The sample plans dealt with in the previous chapter
aid quick distribution. They often pay for themselves
in this way alone.
If the samples are distributed locally, the coupon
names the stores. The prospects who go there to get
the samples know that those stores are supplied, if a
nearer dealer is not. Thus little trade is lost.
When sample inquiries come to the advertiser,
inquiries are referred to certain dealers at the start.
Enough demand is centered there to force those
dealers to supply it.
Sometimes most stores are supplied with samples,
but on the requirement of a certain purchase. You
supply a dozen samples with a dozen packages, for
instance. Then inquiries for samples are referred to all
stores. This quickly forces general distribution.
Dealers don't like to have their customers go to
competitors even for a sample.
Where a coupon is used, good at any store for a fullsize package, the problem of distribution becomes
simple. Mail to dealers proofs of the ad which will
contain the coupon. Point out to each that many of his
customers are bound to present that coupon. Each
Carl Galletti

- 84 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

coupon means a cash sale at full profit. No average
dealer will let those coupon customers go elsewhere.
Such a free-package offer often pays for itself in this
way. It forms the cheapest way of getting general
distribution.
Some of the most successful advertisers have done
this in a national way. They have inserted coupon ads
in magazines, each coupon good at any store for a fullsize package. A proof of the ad is sent to dealers in
advance, with a list of the magazines to be used, and
their circulation.
In this way, in one week sometimes, makers attain a
reasonable national distribution. And the coupon ad,
when it appears, completes it. Here again the free
packages cost less than other ways of forcing
distribution. And they start thousands of users
besides. Palmolive Soap and Puffed Grains are among
the products which attained their distribution in that
way.
Half the circulation of a newspaper may go to
outside towns. That half may be wasted if you offer a
sample at local stores. Say in your coupon that outside
people should write you for a sample. When they
write, do not mail the sample. Send the samples to a
local store, and refer inquirers to that store. Mailing a
Carl Galletti

- 85 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

sample may make a convert who cannot be supplied.
But the store which supplies the sample will usually
supply demand.
In these ways, many advertisers get national
distribution without employing a single salesman.
They get it immediately. And they get it at far lower
cost than by any other method.
There are advertisers who, in starting, send every
dealer a few packages as a gift. That is better, perhaps,
than losing customers created. But it is very expensive.
Those free packages must be sold by advertising.
Figure their cost at your selling price, and you will see
that you are paying a high cost per dealer. A salesman
might sell these small stocks at a lower cost. And other
methods might be vastly cheaper.
Sending stocks on consignment to retailers is not
widely favored. Many dealers resent it. Collections are
difficult. And unbusinesslike methods do not win
dealer respect.
The plans advocated here are the best plans yet
discovered for the lines to which they apply. Other
lines require different methods. The ramifications are
too many to discuss in a book like this.
But don't start advertising without distribution.
Don't get distribution by methods too expensive. Or by
slow, old-fashioned methods. The loss of time may
Carl Galletti

- 86 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

cost you enormously in sales. And it may enable
energetic rivals to get ahead of you.
Go to men who know by countless experiences the
best plan to apply to your line.

Carl Galletti

- 87 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 15
Test Campaigns
Almost any questions can be answered, cheaply,
quickly and finally, by a test campaign. And that's the
way to answer them – not by arguments around a
table. Go to the court of last resort – the buyers of your
product.
On every new project there comes up the question
of selling that article profitably. You and your friends
may like it, but the majority may not. Some rival
product may be better liked or cheaper. It may be
strongly entrenched. The users won away from it may
cost too much to get.
People may buy and not repeat. The article may last
too long. It may appeal to a small percentage, so most
of your advertising goes to waste.
There are many surprises in advertising. A project
you will laugh at may make a great success. A project
you are sure of may fall down. All because tastes differ
Carl Galletti

- 88 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

so. None of us know enough people’s desires to get an
average viewpoint.
In the old days, advertisers ventured on their own
opinions. The few guessed right, the many wrong.
Those were the times of advertising disasters. Even
those who succeeded came close to the verge before
the tide was turned. They did not know their cost per
customer or their sale per customer. The cost of selling
might take long to come back. Often it never came
back.
Now we let the thousands decide what the millions
will do. We make a small venture, and watch cost and
result. When we learn what a thousand customers
cost, we know almost exactly what a million will cost.
When we learn what they buy, we know what a million
will buy.
We establish averages on a small scale, and those
averages always hold. We know our cost, we know our
sale, we know our profit or our loss. We know how
soon our cost comes back. Before we spread out, we
prove our undertaking absolutely safe. So there are
today no advertising disasters piloted by men who
know.
Perhaps we try out our project in four or five towns.
We may use a sample offer or a free package to get
users started quickly. We learn in this way the cost per
Carl Galletti

- 89 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

customer started. Then we wait and see if users buy
those samples. If they do, will they continue? How
much will they buy? How long does it take for the
profit to return our cost of selling?
A test like this may cost $3,000 to $5,000. It is not
all lost, even when the product proves unpopular.
Some sales are made. Nearly every test will in time
bring back the entire cost.
Sometimes we find that the cost of the advertising
comes back before the bills are due. That means that
the product can be advertised without investment.
Many a great advertiser has been built up without any
cost whatever beyond immediate receipts. That is an
ideal situation.
On another product it may take three months to
bring back the cost with a profit. But one is sure of his
profit in that time. When he spreads out he must
finance accordingly.
Think what this means. A man has what he
considers an advertising possibility. But national
advertising looks so big and expensive that he dare not
undertake it.
Now he presents it in a few average towns, at a very
moderate cost. With almost no risk whatever. From
the few thousand he learns what the millions will do.
Carl Galletti

- 90 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Then he acts accordingly. If he then branches out he
knows to a certainty just what his results will be.
He is playing on the safe side of a hundred to one
shot. If the article is successful, it may make him
millions. If he is mistaken about it, the loss is a trifle.
These are facts we desire to emphasize and spread.
All our largest accounts are now built in this way, from
very small beginnings. When business men realize that
this can be done, hundreds of others will do it. For
countless fortune-earners now lie dormant.
The largest advertiser in the world makes a
business of starting such projects. One by one he finds
out winners. Now he has twenty-six, and together they
earn many millions yearly.
These test campaigns have other purposes. They
answer countless questions which arise in business.
A large food advertiser felt that his product would
be more popular in another form. He and all his
advisers were certain about it. They were willing to act
on this supposition without consulting the consumers,
but wiser advice prevailed.
He inserted an ad in a few towns with a coupon,
good at any store for a package of the new-style
product. Then he wrote to the users about it. They
were almost unanimous in their disapproval.
Carl Galletti

- 91 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Later the same product was suggested in still
another form. The previous verdict made the change
look dubious. The advertiser hardly thought a test to
be worth while. But he submitted the question to a few
thousand women in a similar way and 91 percent
voted for it. Now he has a unique product which
promises to largely increase his sales.
These tests cost about $1,000 each. The first one
saved him a very costly mistake. The second will
probably bring him large profits.
Then we use test campaigns to try out new methods
on advertising already successful. Thus we constantly
seek for better methods, without interrupting plans
already proved out.
In five years for one food advertiser we tried out
over fifty separate plans. Every little while we found
an improvement, so the results of our advertising
constantly grew. At the end of five years we found the
best plan of all. It reduced our cost of selling by 75
percent. That is, it was four times more effective than
the best plan used before.
That is what mail order advertisers do – try out plan
after plan to constantly reduce the cost. Why should
any general advertiser be less business-like and
careful?
Another service of the test campaign is this:
Carl Galletti

- 92 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

An advertiser is doing mediocre advertising. A
skilled advertising agent feels that he can greatly
increase results. The advertiser is doubtful. He is doing
fairly well. He has alliances which he hesitates to
break. So he is inclined to let well enough alone.
Now the question can be submitted to the verdict of
a test. The new agent may take a few towns, without
interfering with the general campaign. Then compare
his results with the general results and prove his
greater skill.
Plausible arguments are easy in this line. One man
after another comes to an advertiser to claim superior
knowledge or ability. It is hard to decide, and decisions
may be wrong.
Now actual figures gained at a small cost can settle
the question definitely. The advertiser makes no
commitment. It is like saying to a salesman, "Go out for
a week and prove yourself." A large percentage of all
the advertising done would change hands if this
method were applied.
Again we come back to scientific advertising.
Suppose a chemist would say in an arbitrary way that
this compound was best, or that better. You would
little respect his opinion. He makes tests – sometimes
hundreds of tests – to actually know which is best. He
will never state a supposition before he has proved it.
Carl Galletti

- 93 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

How long before advertisers in general will apply that
exactness to advertising?

Carl Galletti

- 94 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 16
Leaning On Dealers
We cannot depend much in most lines on the active
help of jobbers or of dealers. They are busy. They have
many lines to consider. The profit on advertised lines
is not generally large. And an advertised article is apt
to be sold at cut prices.
The average dealer does what you would do. He
exerts himself on brands of his own, if at all. Not on
another man’s brand.
The dealer will often try to make you think
otherwise. He will ask some aid or concession on the
ground of extra effort. Advertisers often give extra
discounts. Or they make loading offers – perhaps one
case free in ten – in the belief that loaded dealers will
make extra efforts.
This may be so on rare lines, but not generally. And
efforts if made do not usually increase the total sales.
They merely swing trade from one store to another.
Carl Galletti

- 95 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

On most lines, making a sale without making a
convert does not count for much. Sales made by
conviction – by advertising – are likely to bring
permanent customers. People who buy through casual
recommendations do not often stick. Next time
someone else gives other advice.
Revenue which belongs to the advertiser is often
given away without adequate return. These discounts
and gifts could be far better spent in securing new
customers.
Free goods must be sold, and by your own efforts
usually. One extra case with ten means that
advertising must sell ten percent more to bring you
the same return. The dealer would probably buy just
as much if you let him buy as convenient.
Much money is often frittered away on other forms
of dealer help. Perhaps on window or store displays. A
window display, acting as a reminder, may bring to
one dealer a lion’s share of the trade. Yet it may not
increase your total sales at all.
Those are facts to find out. Try one town in one way,
one in another. Compare total sales in those towns. In
many lines such tests will show that costly displays
are worthless. A growing number of experienced
advertisers spend no money on displays. This is all in
line of general publicity, so popular long ago. Casting
Carl Galletti

- 96 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

bread upon the waters and hoping for its return. Most
advertising was of that sort twenty years ago.
Now we put things to the test. We compare cost and
result on every form of expenditure. It is easily done.
Very many costly wastes are eliminated by this
modern process.
Scientific advertising has altered many old plans
and conceptions. It has proved many long established
methods to be folly. And why should we not apply to
these things the same criterion we apply to other
forms of selling? Or to manufacturing costs?
Your object in all advertising is to buy new
customers at a price which pays a profit. You have no
interest in centering trade at any particular store.
Learn what your consumers cost and what they buy. If
they cost you one dollar each, figure that every wasted
dollar costs you a possible customer.
Your business will be built in that way, not by dealer
help. You must do your own selling, make your own
success. Be content if dealers fill the orders that you
bring. Eliminate your wastes. Spend all your
ammunition where it counts for most.

Carl Galletti

- 97 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 17
Individuality
A person who desires to make an impression must
stand out in some way from the masses. And in a
pleasing way. Being eccentric, being abnormal is not a
distinction to covet. But doing admirable things in a
different way gives one a great advantage.
So with salesmen, in person or in print. There is
uniqueness which belittles and arouses resentment.
There is refreshing uniqueness which enhances, which
we welcome and remember. Fortunate is the salesman
who has it.
We try to give each advertiser a becoming style. We
make him distinctive, perhaps not in appearance, but
in manner and in tone. He is given an individuality
best suited to the people he addresses.
One man appears rugged and honest in a line where
rugged honesty counts. One may be a good fellow
Carl Galletti

- 98 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

where choice is a matter of favor. In other lines the
man stands out by impressing himself as an authority.
We have already cited a case where a woman made
a great success in selling clothing to girls, solely
through a created personality which won.
That's why we have signed ads sometimes – to give
them a personal authority. A man is talking – a man
who takes pride in his accomplishments – not a
"soulless corporation." Whenever possible we
introduce a personality into our ads. By making a man
famous we make his product famous. When we claim
an improvement, naming the man who made it adds
effect.
Then we take care not to change an individuality
which has proved appealing. Before a man writes a
new ad on that line, he gets into the spirit adopted by
the advertiser. He plays a part as an actor plays it.
In successful advertising great pains are taken to
never change our tone. That which won so many is
probably the best way to win others. Then people
come to know us. We build on that acquaintance
rather than introduce a stranger in strange guise.
People do not know us by name alone, but by looks
and mannerisms. Appearing different every time we
meet never builds up confidence.
Carl Galletti

- 99 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Then we don't want people to think that
salesmanship is made to order. That our appeals are
created, studied, artificial. They must seem to come
from the heart, and the same heart always, save where
a wrong tack forces a complete change.
There are winning personalities in ads as well as
people. To some we are glad to listen, others bore us.
Some are refreshing, some commonplace. Some
inspire confidence, some caution.
To create the right individuality is a supreme
accomplishment. Then an advertiser’s growing
reputation on that line brings him ever-increasing
prestige. Never weary of that part. Remember that a
change in our characteristics would compel our best
friends to get acquainted all over.

Carl Galletti

- 100 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 18
Negative Advertising
To attack a rival is never good advertising. Don't
point out others' faults. It is not permitted in the best
mediums. It is never good policy. The selfish purpose
is apparent. It looks unfair, not sporty. If you abhor
knockers, always appear a good fellow.
Show the bright side, the happy and attractive side,
not the dark and uninviting side of things. Show
beauty, not homeliness; health, not sickness. Don't
show the wrinkles you propose to remove, but the face
as it will appear. Your customers know all about
wrinkles.
In advertising a dentifrice, show pretty teeth, not
bad teeth. Talk of coming good conditions, not
conditions which exist. In advertising clothes, picture
well-dressed people, not the shabby. Picture
successful men, not failures, when you advertise a
Carl Galletti

- 101 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

business course. Picture what others wish to be, not
what they may be now.
We are attracted by sunshine, beauty, happiness,
health, success. Then point the way to them, not the
way out of the opposite.
Picture envied people, not the envious.
Tell people what to do, not what to avoid.
Make your every ad breathe good cheer. We always
dodge a Lugubrious Blue.
Assume that people will do what you ask. Say, "Send
now for this sample." Don't say, "Why do you neglect
this offer?" That suggests that people are neglecting.
Invite them to follow the crowd.
Compare the results of two ads, one negative, one
positive. One presenting the dark side, one the bright
side. One warning, the other inviting. You will be
surprised. You will find that the positive ad outpulls
the other four to one, if you have our experience.
The "Before and after taking" ads are follies of the
past. They never had a place save with the afflicted.
Never let their memory lead you to picture the gloomy
side of things.

Carl Galletti

- 102 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 19
Letter Writing
This is another phase of advertising which all of us
have to consider. It enters, or should enter, into nearly
all campaigns. Every business man receives a large
number of circular letters. Most of them go direct to
the waste basket. But he acts on others, and others are
filed for reference.
Analyze those letters. The ones you act on or the
ones you keep have a headline which attracted your
interest. At a glance they offer something that you
want, something you may wish to know.
Remember that point in all advertising
A certain buyer spends $50,000,000 per year. Every
letter, every circular which comes to his desk gets its
deserved attention. He wants information on the lines
he buys.
But we have often watched him. In one minute a
score of letters may drop into the waste basket. Then
Carl Galletti

- 103 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

one is laid aside. That is something to consider at once.
Another is filed under the heading "Varnish." And later
when he buys varnish that letter will turn up.
That buyer won several prizes by articles on good
buying. His articles were based on information. Yet the
great masses of matter which came to him never got
more than a glance.
The same principles apply to all advertising. Letter
writers overlook them just as advertisers do. They fail
to get the right attention. They fail to tell what buyers
wish to know.
One magazine sends out millions of letters annually.
Some to get subscriptions, some to sell books. Before
the publisher sends out five million letters he puts a
few thousands to test. He may try twenty-five letters,
each with a thousand prospects. He learns what
results will cost. Perhaps the plan is abandoned
because it appears unprofitable. If not, the letter which
pays best is the letter that he uses.
Just as men are doing now in all scientific
advertising.
Mail order advertisers do likewise. They test their
letters as they test their ads. A general letter is never
used until it proves itself best among many actual
returns.
Carl Galletti

- 104 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Letter writing has much to do with advertising.
Letters to inquirers, follow-up letters. Wherever
possible they should be tested. Where that is not
possible, they should be based on knowledge gained
by tests.
We find the same difference in letters as in ads.
Some get action, some do not. Some complete a sale,
some forfeit the impression gained. These letters,
going usually to half-made converts, that are
tremendously important.
Experience generally shows that a two-cent letter
gets no more attention than a one-cent letter. Fine
stationery no more than poor stationery. The whole
appeal lies in the matter.
It has been found that fine stationery and pamphlets
lessen the effect. They indicate an effort to sell on
other lines than merit. That has the same effect in
letters as in ads.
A letter which goes to an inquirer is like a salesman
going to an interested prospect. You know what
created that interest. Then follow it up along that line,
not on some different argument. Complete the
impression already created. Don't undertake another
on a guess.
In a letter as in ads, the great point is to get
immediate action. People are naturally dilatory. They
Carl Galletti

- 105 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

postpone, and a postponed action is too often
forgotten.
Do something if possible to get immediate action.
Offer some inducement for it. Or tell what delay may
cost. Note how many successful selling letters place a
limit on an offer. It expires on a certain date. That is all
done to get a prompt decision, to overcome the
tendency to delay.
A mail order advertiser offered a catalog. The
inquirer might send for three or four similar catalogs.
He had that competition in making a sale.
So he wrote a letter when he sent his catalog, and
enclosed a personal card. He said, "You are a new
customer, and we want to make you welcome. So
when you send your order please enclose this card.
The writer wants to see that you get a gift with the
order – something you can keep."
With an old customer he gave some other reason for
the gift. The offer aroused curiosity. It gave preference
to his catalog. Without some compelling reason for
ordering elsewhere, the woman sent the order to him.
The gift paid for itself several times over by bringing
larger sales per catalog.
The ways for getting action are many. Rarely can
one way be applied to two lines. But the principles are
Carl Galletti

- 106 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

universal. Strike while the iron is hot. Get a decision
then. Have it followed by prompt action when you can.
You can afford to pay for prompt action rather than
lose by delay. One advertiser induced hundreds of
thousands of women to buy six packages of his
product and send him the trademarks, to secure a
premium offer good only for one week.

Carl Galletti

- 107 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 20
A Name That Helps
There is great advantage in a name that tells a story.
The name is usually prominently displayed. To justify
the space it occupies, it should aid the advertising.
Some such names are almost complete advertisements
in themselves. May Breath is such a name. Cream of
Wheat is another. That name alone has been worth a
fortune. Other examples are Dutch Cleanser, Cuticura,
Dynashine, Minute Tapioca, 3-in-One Oil, Holeproof,
Alcorub, etc.
Such names may be protected, yet the name itself
describes the product, so it makes a valuable display.
Other coined names are meaningless. Some
examples are Kodak, Karo, Mazda, Sapolio, Vaseline,
Kotex, Lux, Postum, etc. They can be protected, and
long-continued advertising may give them a meaning.
When this is accomplished they become very
Carl Galletti

- 108 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

valuable. But the great majority of them never attain
that status.
Such names do not aid the advertising. It is very
doubtful that they justify display. The service of the
product, not the name, is the important thing in
advertising. A vast amount of space is wasted in
displaying names and pictures which tell no selling
story. The tendency of modern advertising is to
eliminate this waste.
Other coined names signify ingredients which
anyone may use. Examples are Syrup of Figs, Coconut
Oil Shampoo, Tar Soap, Palmolive Soap, etc.
Such products may dominate a market if the price is
reasonable, but they must to a degree meet
competition. They invite substitution. They are
naturally classified with other products which have
like ingredients, so the price must remain in that class.
Toasted Corn Flakes and Malted Milk are examples
of unfortunate names. In each of those cases one
advertiser created a new demand. When the demand
was created, others shared it because they could use
the name. The originators depended only on a brand.
It is interesting to speculate on how much more
profitable a coined name might have been.
On a patented product it must be remembered that
the right to a name expires with that patent. Names
Carl Galletti

- 109 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

like Castoria, Aspirin, Shredded Wheat Biscuit, etc.,
have become common property.
This is a very serious point to consider. It often
makes a patent an undesirable protection.
Another serious fault in coined names is frivolity. In
seeking uniqueness one gets something trivial. And
that is a fatal handicap in a serious product. It almost
prohibits respect.
When a product must be called by a common name,
the best auxiliary name is a man’s name. It is much
better than a coined name, for it shows that some man
is proud of his creation.
Thus the question of a name is of serious
importance in laying the foundations of a new
undertaking. Some names have become the chief
factors in success. Some have lost for their originators
four-fifths of the trade they developed.

Carl Galletti

- 110 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Chapter 21
Good Business
A rapid stream ran by the writer’s boyhood home.
The stream turned a wooden wheel and the wheel ran
a mill. Under that primitive method, all but a fraction
of the stream’s potentiality went to waste.
Then someone applied scientific methods to that
stream – put in a turbine and dynamos. Now, with no
more water, no more power, it runs a large
manufacturing plant.
We think of that steam when we see wasted
advertising power. And we see it everywhere –
hundreds of examples. Enormous potentialities –
millions of circulation – used to turn a mill-wheel.
While others use that same power with manifold
effect.
We see countless ads running year after year which
we know to be unprofitable. Men spending five dollars
to do what one dollar might do. Men getting back 30
Carl Galletti

- 111 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

percent of their cost when they might get 150 percent.
And the facts could be easily proved.
We see wasted space, frivolity, clever conceits,
entertainment. Costly pages filled with palaver which,
if employed by a salesman, would reflect on his sanity.
But those ads are always unkeyed. The money is spent
blindly, merely to satisfy some advertising whim.
Not new advertisers only. Many an old advertiser
has little or no idea of his advertising results. The
business is growing through many efforts combined,
and advertising is given its share of the credit.
An advertiser of many years’ standing, spending as
high as $700,000 per year, told the writer he did not
know whether his advertising was worth anything or
not. Sometimes he thought that his business would be
just as large without it.
The writer replied, "I do know. Your advertising is
utterly unprofitable, and I could prove it to you in one
week. End an ad with an offer to pay five dollars to
anyone who writes you that he read the ad through.
The scarcity of replies will amaze you."
Think what a confession – that millions of dollars
being spent without knowledge of results. Such a
policy applied to all factors in a business would bring
ruin in short order.
Carl Galletti

- 112 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

You see other ads which you may not like as well.
They may seem crowded or verbose. They are not
attractive to you, for you are seeking something to
admire, something to entertain. But you will note that
those ads are keyed. The advertiser knows that they
pay. The probability is that out of scores of traced ads
the type which you see has paid best.
Many other ads which are not keyed now were
keyed at the beginning. They are based on known
statistics. They won on a small scale before they ever
ran on large scale. Those advertisers are utilizing their
enormous powers in full.
Advertising is prima facie evidence that the man
who pays believes that advertising is good. It has
brought great results to others, it must be good for
him. So he takes it like some secret tonic which others
have endorsed. If the business thrives, the tonic gets
credit. Otherwise, the failure is due to fate.
That seems almost unbelievable. Even a storekeeper
who inserts a twenty-dollar ad knows whether it pays
or not. Every line of a big store’s ad is charged to the
proper department. And every inch used must the next
day justify its cost.
Yet most national advertising is done without
justification. It is merely presumed to pay. A little test
might show a way to multiply returns.
Carl Galletti

- 113 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Such methods, still so prevalent, are not very far
from their end. The advertising men who practice
them see the writing on the wall. The time is fast
coming when men who spend money are going to
know what they get. Good business and efficiency will
be applied to advertising. Men and methods will be
measured by the known returns, and only competent
men can survive.
Only one hour ago an old advertising man said to
the writer, "The day for our type is done. Bunk has lost
its power. Sophistry is being displaced by actuality.
And I tremble at the trend."
So do hundreds tremble. Enormous advertising is
being done along scientific lines. Its success is common
knowledge. Advertisers along other lines will not
much longer be content.
We who can meet the test welcome these changed
conditions. Advertisers will multiply when they see
that advertising can be safe and sure. Small
expenditures made on a guess will grow to big ones on
a certainty. Our line of business will be finer, cleaner,
when the gamble is removed. And we shall be prouder
of it when we are judged on merit.
--- The End ---

Carl Galletti

- 114 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Products Currently Available (as of June 2021)
at ScientificAdvertising.com/dir
Copywriter Protégé Program Videos,
Copywriting Magic by Brian Keith
Audios, Transcripts & Supplemental
Voiles
Materials
CopyMagic (book)
All 12 of My Dan Kenney Products
CopyMagic audio
● Dan Kennedy Direct Marketing
Eugene Schwartz - I Write With My
SuperConference
Ears
● Advanced Copywriting Seminar
Eugene Schwartz 206 Ads
● Advise And Profit
Eugene Schwartz LIVE! - Gene
● Dan Kennedy on Infomercials (also
Schwartz at Rodale Press VIDEO
applies to VSLs)
& AUDIO
● Copywriting Clinic
Eugene Schwartz on Breakthrough
● Customer Appreciation Seminar
Copy
● Magnetic Marketing Deluxe
Freedom Encyclopedia - Gene Schwartz
● Mega Success System For Speakers
mailing piece for Bill Kaysing's
● Platinum Inner Circle Master Mind
Fundamentals in Advertising by Albert
● The Official Millionaire Money
Lasker
Maker System
Graphics and Desktop Publishing
● Ultimate Information Enterprenuer
Secrets for Non-Artists
● The UltimateInternet Entrepreneur
Graphics That Sell by Ted Kikoler
7 Steps To Killer Copy by Russ Phelps
How Shall We Know Good Copy by
11 Principles You Really Need To Know
John E. Kennedy eBook and Audio
If You Expect To Make Money On
How To Be Your Own Best Marketing
The Internet
Expert
41 Great Ads
How To Create Advertising That Sells
50 Things I've Learned in 50 Years by
by David Ogilvy
John Caples
How To Create Your Own Profit
72 Master Letters
Producing Headlines, Titles, and
100 Best Headlines and How They
Bullets
Could Make You Rich
How To Make Maximum PROFITS In
127 Winning Headlines by Lawrence
Minimum Time
Bernstein
How To Turn Your Swipe File Into A
2001 Greatest Headlines Ever Written
Gold Mine
Advertising Magic by Brian Keith
How To Wake Up the Marketing
Voiles
Genius Inside You
A Message to Garcia Text&Audio
How To Write A Good Advertisement
Billion Dollar Ads 871p
1942
Brett McFall Reports
How To Write Letters That Win
Burn Disease Out of Your Body mailing
How To Write Website Copy That Sells
piece by Eugene Schwartz
by Scott Smith
Business Correspondence Library
Hurricane Andrew Seminar
Carl Galletti’s Internet Marketing
Internet Marketing SuperConference 8
Newsletter 21 issues
Intensive Advertising eBook
Carl Galletti

- 115 -

ScientificAdvertising.com

Intensive Advertising Audio
Lord & Thomas Ads That Teach
Advertising
Lord & Thomas Creeds
Marketing Made Easy Workshop
11h44m, 381p
Million-Dollar Secrets of the Most
Expensive Copywriters in the World
- Interview with DanLok
Money Making Sales Letters
My Life in Advertising Audio
My Life in Advertising eBook
Newstrack Advertising Classics
Obvious Adams
Power Copywriting For the Internet
PsychologyOfAdvertising
Reason Why Advertising AUDIO
Reason Why Advertising eBook
Robert Collier's Million Dollar Sales
Letters
Roundtable with Carl Galletti, Peter
Sun, and Ralph Napolitano

Scientific Advertising Illustrated Vol 2
Scientific Advertising - Audio
Scientific Advertising - Troy S.
Laughren Video Movie
Secrets of the Greatest Advertising
Geniuses
The Claude Hopkins Swipe File
The First Hundred Million Expanded
Edition
The Ginger Cure
The Greatest Advertising Secrets of All
Time
The Greatest Direct Mail Sales Letters
of All Time
The Modern Store - John E. Powers
The Robert Collier Letter Book 1931
The Top Secret Sales Letter Checklist
of Million Dollar Copywriters by
Dan Lok
Underground Email Copy That Sells
Like Crazy by Jo Han Mok
Underground Sales Letters

My Very Best to You,

Carl Galletti
Help@CarlGalletti.com
ScientificAdvertising.com/dir
928-300-0168
(I will probably be busy when you call but your call is important to me so please
leave a voice mail message plus return phone & email)

Carl Galletti

- 116 -

ScientificAdvertising.com



======================================================================
FILE: a01 cash front.pmd - cashvertising.txt
======================================================================

CA$HVERTISING
How to Use
More Than 100 Secrets
of Ad-Agency Psychology
to Make BIG MONEY
Selling Anything to Anyone

DREW ERIC WHITMAN

Franklin Lakes, NJ

Copyright © 2009 by Drew Eric Whitman
All rights reserved under the Pan-American and International Copyright Conventions. This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in
part, in any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system now known or hereafter invented, without written permission
from the publisher, The Career Press.
CASHVERTISING
EDITED AND TYPESET BY KARA REYNOLDS
Cover design by The DesignWorks Group
Printed in the U.S.A. by Book-mart Press
To order this title, please call toll-free 1-800-CAREER-1 (NJ and Canada:
201-848-0310) to order using VISA or MasterCard, or for further information on books from Career Press.

The Career Press, Inc., 3 Tice Road, PO Box 687,
Franklin Lakes, NJ 07417
www.careerpress.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Whitman, Drew Eric.
Cashvertising : how to use more than 100 secrets of ad-agency
psychology to make big money selling anything to anyone / by Drew
Eric Whitman.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-60163-032-2
1. Advertising—Psychological aspects. 2. Marketing—Psychological aspects. I. Title.
HF5822.W47 2009
659.101’9--dc22
2008030819

Want Better Results From Your Advertising?
Ad expert Drew Eric Whitman says:
“I’ll teach you more about how to create powerfully effective
moneymaking advertising than your competitors will know in their
entire careers—guaranteed!”

Dear Friend:
Did you ever see a magician saw a lady in half? A sword swallower gobble
down a 28-inch blade? A swami walk barefoot over a bed of fiery coals?
These tricks are amazing. Mind-boggling. And seemingly impossible.
But the truth is, if you knew the secrets behind them, you could do
them too.
Creating Effective Advertising Is No Different!
Because, just as do those uncanny magicians, today’s advertising experts have special tricks of their own. They use consumer psychology, powerful methods that influence people to read their ads, and buy like crazy.
In fact, New York’s biggest ad agencies use these tactics every day. And
it doesn’t matter what their clients sell; these tricks work for every business. Plus, they’re 100 percent legal, ethical, and powerful.
Best of all...
(Go to next page)...

If You’re Ready to Learn the Secrets...
I’m Ready to Teach You!
Invest a few tax-deductible* dollars in this fun, fast, and easy-to-read
book. In these fast-reading pages, I arm you with techniques that can
help make your competition virtually disappear. I teach you how to
turn weak, ineffective ads, brochures, sales letters, flyers, e-mails, and
Websites into psychologically potent money-makers that help boost your
business fast. No special skills are required. And most tricks cost nothing to use. Once you know the secrets, it’s easy!
Meet you inside!

Drew Eric Whitman

P.S. I knew you’d read this P.S. How? Because the P.S. is one of the most
important parts of any sales letter, and it’s often read first, before the
body copy. Always use the P.S. to restate your offer here. Repeat your
contact information, and push your prospect to take action! Now, turn
the page and start reading!
* Consult your tax advisor.

To my loving parents, Bob and Eileen, for fostering my
childhood passion for advertising and business...even
when I should have been doing my homework.
To my wonderful wife, Lindsay, for supporting my creative
ideas, wacky plans, and off-beat business ventures that
often keep me awake until dawn.
To Gary Halbert, the “Prince of Print,” for helping me develop my voice when I was a mere copy cub.
To John Caples, who taught me the definition of
great advertising.
To Walter Weir, whose dedication and personal
instruction helped me land my first agency
copywriting job in 1984.
And to all who find value in what I do.

Thank you.

Drew Eric Whitman, July 2008

Contents

PREFACE

11

INTRODUCTION

15

CHAPTER 1: WHAT PEOPLE REALLY WANT

19

✸ The Life-Force 8
✸ The Nine Learned (Secondary) Human Wants

CHAPTER 2: HOW TO GET INSIDE THEIR HEADS:
THE 17 FOUNDATIONAL PRINCIPLES OF CONSUMER
PSYCHOLOGY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

29

The Fear Factor—Selling the Scare
Ego Morphing—Instant Identification
Transfer—Credibility by Osmosis
The Bandwagon Effect—Give Them Something to Jump On
The Means-End Chain—The Critical Core
The Transtheoretical Model—Persuasion Step by Step
The Inoculation Theory—Make Them Prefer You for Life

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Belief Re-ranking—Change Their Reality
The Elaboration Likelihood Model—Adjust Their Attitude
The 6 Weapons of Influence—Shortcuts to Persuasion
Message Organization—Attaining Critical Clarity
Examples vs. Statistics—And the Winner Is...
Message Sideness—Dual-Role Persuasion
Repetition and Redundancy—The Familiarity Factor
Rhetorical Questions—Interesting, Aren’t They?
Evidence—Quick! Sell Me the Facts!
Heuristics—Serving Billions of Lazy Brains Daily

CHAPTER 3: AD-AGENCY SECRETS: 41 PROVEN
TECHNIQUES FOR SELLING ANYTHING TO ANYONE
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

The Psychology of Simplicity
Bombard Your Readers With Benefits
Put Your Biggest Benefit in Your Headline
Crank up the Scarcity
22 Psychologically Potent Headline Starters
12 Ways to Lure Readers Into Your Copy
360 Degrees of Attention-Getting Power
The Reverse-Type Pitfall
Crush Your Competition With Extreme Specificity
The Famous Ogilvy Principle
The Psychology of Typefaces
Insist on the Pro-Design Difference
The Power of Questions
The “Granny Rule” of Direct Mail
The Psychology of “Social Proof ”
The Guillotine Principle
PVAs–The Easy Way to Boost the Power of Your Copy
Directing Mental Movies
Battling Human Inertia

79

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

Establish Your Unique Selling Proposition
Buy Your Own Island
Authority Positioning
A Sales Letter in Survey’s Clothing
Power Your Ads With Pictures
Grab ’Em With Grabbers
Long Copy vs. Short
Offer Testing
Survey Power
Editorial Energizers
The Coupon Persuader
7 Online Response Boosters
Multi-page Your Way to Success
Guarantees that Guarantee Higher Response
The Psychology of Size
The Psychology of Page and Section Positioning
The Fantastic Four
Consumer Color Preferences and How Color Affects
Readership
The Psychology of Pricing
The Psychology of Color
Wrap Your Ads in White
Give Yourself a “Cleverectomy”

CHAPTER 4: HOT LISTS: 101 EASY WAYS
TO BOOST YOUR AD RESPONSE
✸
✸
✸
✸
✸

22 Response Superchargers
9 Ways to Convey Value
13 Ways to Make Buying Easy
11 Ways to Boost Coupon Returns
46-Point “Killer Ad” Checklist

187

EPILOGUE

193

APPENDIX: RECOMMENDED READING

195

INDEX

199

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

203

Preface

Trash, trash, trash!
That’s how I describe 99 percent of today’s advertising. It’s dumb.
Boring. Weak. Not worth the paper it’s printed on.
Am I angry? No. Realistic? Yes. But don’t just take my word for it.
Look in your trash can. How much of the nonsense you get in the mail
winds up there before you open it? How much of what you do open
ends up in the same place before you finish reading the first few lines?
How many TV commercials have convinced you to buy? How many
e-mails have persuaded you to spend money? How many Websites have
bored you to tears?
I rest my case.

The Bottom Line: The Goal of
Advertising Is to Get People to Act
Whether you want them to ask for more details, shoot you some
cash via PayPal, or whip out their Visa, it’s action that makes advertising
pay off. Because advertising is not journalism. It’s not news reporting.
As a journalist, your job is to report what happened. You don’t need
people to respond to succeed. Your primary interest is that they’re accurately informed and somewhat entertained.
When you write advertising, on the other hand, you want people to
do more than just read. You want them to do more than simply say,

11

CA$HVERTISING
“Wow...great ad!” and then toss it into the kitchen trash on top of the
grapefruit skins. No. You want people to act now, to place an order or
request information that’s designed to persuade them to order. Let’s
not kid each other, we advertise for one reason: to make money. Period.
Do you know why most advertising today is so lousy? It’s because
most people in advertising today don’t know a damned thing about
what makes people buy. Believe it or not, it’s true. They like to be cutesy
and clever. They like to win awards for creativity that do nothing more
than boost their egos and waste thousands of dollars for their clients.
Most advertisers (and their agencies) don’t know how to capture people’s
imagination, and make them want to open up their wallets and spend
money. When I asked my mentor, advertising great Walter Weir, “Why is
most advertising today so lousy—even the ads put out by giant and
successful companies?” He replied in his deep, radio announcer-like
voice, “Drew, they simply don’t know any better.”
That’s why I wrote this book. To pierce the veil of silly nonsense and
costly myths. To pull off the blinders worn by so many well-meaning
but terribly misinformed businesspeople who are scratching their heads
wondering why their crippled horses—their poorly constructed ads,
brochures, sales letters, e-mails, and Websites—aren’t winning races.
Ninety-nine percent of advertising
doesn’t sell much of anything.
—David Ogilvy, founder,
Ogilvy & Mather Advertising Agency

How to Read This Book:
Advice From the Masters
Some time ago, an American reporter traveled to Tibet to interview
a wise old Zen master. When the two sat down for tea, instead of letting
the Zen master do the talking, the reporter began to brag about all the
things he knew about life!
The guy ranted on and on while the master poured the reporter’s
tea. As he endlessly babbled, the tea quickly rose to the rim of his cup
and began spilling all over the floor. The reporter finally stopped yakking and said with surprise, “What are you doing? You can’t pour in
any more! The cup is overflowing!”

12

Preface
“Yes,” responded the wise master. “This teacup, like your mind, is
so full of ideas that there is no room for new information. You must first
empty your head before any new knowledge can enter.”
Be open to new ideas, but do not believe what I tell you.
Don’t either believe or disbelieve what you read in this book. I don’t
even want you to accept what I say as the best way. And, most of all,
please don’t read this book and then say, “Wow! Drew Eric Whitman
really knows his stuff!” and then sit down with a bag of chips and watch
Seinfeld reruns.
Mere belief in these ideas won’t put cash in your pockets. Belief
alone won’t put food on your table, clothes on your back, or a new car
in your driveway. Instead, I want you to experience the results of using
the techniques I share with you. Experience how your business and
bank account grow. Experience the thrill of having an ever-increasing
number of people hand you cash, write you checks, debit their credit
cards, and pump up your PayPal account. How? By putting these principles into action.
No matter what you sell, I hope this book helps you succeed. If one
day you can attribute even a tiny percentage of your success to what
I’ve taught you, I will have succeeded as well.

13

Introduction

Would you like to learn dozens of little-known principles and techniques of advertising psychology used by the world’s highest-paid copywriters and designers?
If you said yes, this book will open a whole new world for you. It will
teach you secrets known only to the masters of persuasion, the ad-agency
experts who know how to tap into people’s innermost desires, and influence them to spend money. It will teach you what to do and how to
do it.
Bottom line: This book will help you make more money.
And it doesn’t matter if you sell aardvarks or zwieback cookies. Because I’m going to teach you—right here in these fast-moving pages—
how to tap into the minds of your prospects like a highly paid consumer
psychologist; like a supremely skilled ad-agency copywriter who knows
(and uses) all the tricks of the trade to influence consumers to read
their offers, and respond by pulling out their wallets.

Persuasion and Influence
Now, if these two words scare you, stop reading here. Really. It means
this book is not for you. (I just used a technique on you. Keep reading
and I’ll teach you how to use it too.) You see, to many, these words
conjure up thoughts of evildoers out to take advantage of the poor,
unsuspecting public.

15

CA$HVERTISING
Advertising is only evil when it advertises evil things.
—David Ogilvy
The truth is, you and I are influenced by these techniques every
day. And when used properly to advertise quality products and services,
it’s perfectly legal, ethical, and moral.
Question: When you walk into a car dealership, do you really think
you’re simply having an everyday chat with the sales rep? Sorry, you’re
not. A skilled salesperson is a master in psychological communication
strategies. Chances are, you are not. And it’s the salesperson’s goal to
move you from “looker” to “buyer.”
You see, while you’re shooting the breeze, admiring the beautiful,
shiny paint, breathing in the aromatic leather upholstery, and drooling
over the 550-horsepower engine, that “nice” salesperson is reading you
like a book.
Like it or not, he’s pulling you through a series of deliciously persuasive steps that are rapidly and continually being tailored to your
every response—and you’re not even noticing! (Why did I just say pulling
you rather than taking you? Was it intentional? Oh yes. I’ll explain in
detail, later in this book.) If you say A, he’ll say B. If instead you say C,
he’ll jump to D. There’s little you can do to surprise him. He’s seen it
all before.
Listen: His goal is not to be your friend. It’s also not to whittle away
his day with pleasant chatter. His goal is for you to sign a hardcore,
legally binding contract—the act that puts money in his pocket and
food on his table.
But don’t be alarmed: That’s what sales is all about, of course! And
if you’re happy with your purchase, maybe you’ll buy your next car
from him. (Chances are he won’t have to work as hard the second time.)
Likewise, advertising’s purpose is not to entertain, but to persuade
consumers to part with billions of dollars every day in exchange for
products and services. And much like you in that car dealership, most
consumers know nothing about the intensive research and psychological methodology that lies behind those ads! Guess what. They’re not
supposed to.
Those commercials you see and hear on TV and radio are more
than just a collection of words and sounds. They are elegant amalgams

16

Introduction
of communication strategies designed to move you from your current
mindset of a looker to that of a buyer.
Did you know that teams of skilled consumer psychologists routinely consult with ad agencies to help them construct ads that powerfully affect consumers on a psychological, even subconscious level? It’s
true! But don’t be alarmed…that’s what advertising is all about! And if
you’re happy with your purchase, maybe you’ll buy again.
You see, advertising is a subset of communication.
Sales is a subset of advertising.
Persuasion is a subset of sales.
And psychology is a subset of persuasion.
Each is a form of the other, and it all leads back to psychology: the
study of the human mind.
“But I just want to keep the good citizens informed, Drew! I don’t
want to influence or persuade anyone!” Hogwash! And I’ll prove it.
Let’s assume you own a pizza shop. (The same holds true no matter
what kind of business you operate: real estate, physician, attorney, roofer,
Web consultant, contractor, whatever.) If you really don’t want to persuade anyone, then why aren’t you running ads that simply state what
you sell, the price, and your address, Website, and phone number, like
this:
GIUSEPPE SELLS PIZZA: $9.99. 123 Mozzarella Road.
www.BigCheeseDisk.com (800)123-4567.
You wouldn’t do it on your life! Why not? I’ll tell you.
Because you don’t dare want the prospects to make up their own
minds as to whether or not they want to buy your pizzas. You’d much
rather make their minds up for them! (That’s persuasion.) You’d rather
tell them how to feel about your pizza. (That’s influence.) The result
being that they buy, buy, buy. (The end result of that persuasion and
influence.)
Studying psychology to boost the effectiveness of your ads isn’t evil.
It simply teaches you:
1. What people want.
2. How they feel about what they want.
3. Why they act as they do.

17

CA$HVERTISING
And once you know this, you can:
1. Better understand how to satisfy your customers.
2. Influence more people to buy.
3. Get your quality products into more people’s hands.
4. Help add more satisfaction to their lives.
See? It’s not so bad after all, is it? Not if you start with a quality
product. Of course, influencing more people to buy a crummy product
that typically self-destructs within the first week of ownership is something else. You don’t need psychology. You need a shot of ethics.
Above all, if you suffer from being too timid in your advertising—as
are most advertisers today—this book will give you a giant boot in the
pants. Ready to dig in? Let’s go!

18

CHAPTER 1

What People Really Want

Born in 1883, Daniel Starch was considered the nation’s leading
advertising and marketing psychologist. His publication Starch Advertising
Readership Reports opened people’s eyes wide. Why? Because his writings showed advertisers how much money they were flushing down
the toilet.
“Think your ad is great?” he said, in so many words, to big magazine advertisers around the country. “Your ‘oh-so-great’ ads are ignored
by more than half of everyone who reads the magazines!” he blasted.
“How could this be?” the ad men puzzled. “Our ads are marvelous...they
show our entire factory, and all our wonderful equipment from several
really unusual camera-angles, and tell about our incredible products!”
Starch blasted them again: “Guess what guys? People couldn’t care
less about your smoke-belching factories! They don’t give a damn about
how many people you have on staff, or how many square feet your company occupies. And they don’t give a flying flounder how fancy your
equipment is, or your—gasp!—’unusual camera angles,’ or any of that
other self-serving junk!”
Instead, Starch’s research showed that people care mostly about is
(get ready for this earth-shaking revelation)...themselves!
They care about what products will do for them, how they’ll make
their lives better, happier, more fulfilled. What a revelation! But isn’t

19

CA$HVERTISING
this common sense? Doesn’t every advertiser know this today? Ha! How
foolish of us to think so.
Just look around you. Look at today’s newspaper and magazine
ads. Check out TV and radio commercials. Surf the Web and look in
your e-mail in-box. You’ll find that what you and I might think was
common sense...is apparently not.
Decades have passed since Daniel Starch issued his initial findings.
Yesterday’s advertising researchers are probably screaming from their
graves today: “Haven’t you learned a thing?! We dedicated years to researching how to make your bank accounts grow like Jack’s freaky
beanstalk. Open your eyes!”
Sigh. It’s frustrating. The truth is, they haven’t learned a thing.
Most (yes, most) of today’s advertisers still haven’t learned the basic
lesson: people don’t care about you, they care first about themselves.
In 1935, H.E. Warren wrote an article entitled “How to Understand
Why People Buy,” which every advertiser and salesperson should read
twice. He said:
To understand why people buy, we...should know people
and have a keen sense of human nature. We should know
how people think...how people live, and be acquainted with
the standards and customs affecting their everyday lives....
We should fully know their needs and their wants and be
able to distinguish between the two. An understanding of
why people buy is gained by a willingness to acquire proved
and tested principles of commercial psychology to selling.
Okay, enough background. Let’s jump in. First, I’ll teach you the 17
foundational principles of consumer psychology. Once you understand
how they work, I’ll teach you 41 easy-to-use, little-known responseboosting advertising techniques. Many of these will incorporate one or
more of the 17 principles, and others will introduce you to psychological theories specific to advertising writing and design. Best of all, I’ll tell
you how to use them in your own promotions to help light a fire under
your sales curve.
Forget everything else. Here’s what people really want.
Consumer researchers and psychologists know what people want.
They should—they’ve studied the subject for years. And although all
researchers don’t agree completely with every finding, there are eight
foundational “desires” common to everyone.

20

What People Really Want
I call them the Life-Force 8 (LF8 for short). These eight powerful
desires are responsible for more sales than all other human wants combined. Here they are. Learn them. Use them. Profit from them.

The Life-Force 8
Human beings are biologically programmed with the following eight
desires:
1. Survival, enjoyment of life, life extension.
2. Enjoyment of food and beverages.
3. Freedom from fear, pain, and danger.
4. Sexual companionship.
5. Comfortable living conditions.
6. To be superior, winning, keeping up with the Joneses.
7. Care and protection of loved ones.
8. Social approval.
Who could argue with these things? We all want them, don’t we?
But in how many of your ads do you openly use an appeal to one or
more of the LF8? I bet few, if any. Why am I such a doubting Thomas?
Simply because it’s unlikely that anyone ever taught you to do so.
Listen: When you create an advertising appeal based on any of the
LF8, you tap into the power of Mother Nature herself. You tap into the
very essence of what makes humans tick. You see, you can’t escape your
desires for the LF8. You were born with them, and they’ll be with you
until the day you die. For example:
✸ Can you shake your desire to eat? (LF8 #2)
✸ Can you suppress your will to survive? (LF8 #1)
✸ How easily can you quash your desire for physical
comfort? (LF8 #5)
✸ Can you stop caring whether or not your child looks both
ways before crossing the street? (LF8 #7)
You don’t need to conduct studies to answer these questions; the
answers are obvious. These desires are biologically programmed in each
of us. They’re part of what makes us human. They’re powerful motivators. And smart advertisers can tap into them like pushing a plug into
an outlet.

21

CA$HVERTISING

What Can You Learn About
Desire From a Master Bookseller?
When it came to making big money selling books, mail order guru
Haldeman-Julius wrote the book. During the 1920s and ’30s he sold
more than 200 million of them, in nearly 2,000 different titles. They
were simple little books, and they all cost just 5 cents each. To advertise
his books, he placed ads consisting of only the books’ titles. If a book
didn’t sell well, he’d change the ad copy, but not the way you’d expect.
He actually changed the titles of the books! Then he’d sit back and
study the response. How clever.
Look what happened when the titles were changed based on the LF8.
Old Title

Annual Sales

New Title

Annual Sales
& LF8 Affected

Ten O’Clock

2,000

What Art Should
Mean to You

9,000 (LF#8)

Fleece of Gold

5,000

Quest for a
Blonde Mistress

50,000 (LF#4)

Art of Controversy

0

How to Argue
Logically

30,000 (LF#6)

Casanova and
His Loves

8,000

Casanova, History’s
Greatest Lover

22,000 (LF#4)

Apothegems

2,000

Truth About the
Riddle of Life

9,000 (LF#1)

According to Haldeman-Julius, the two strongest appeals were sex
and self-improvement. Surprised? Neither am I. So again I ask you: How
many of your current ads contain either of these appeals? When you tap
into these innate desires, you harness the unstoppable momentum of
the emotions that drive people every second of every day.

22

What People Really Want
People buy because of emotion and justify
with logic. Force an emotional response by
touching on a basic want or need.
—“Seven Principles of Stopping Power,”
The Young & Rubicam Traveling Creative Workshop

The Nine Learned
(Secondary) Human Wants
Perhaps you read the list of eight primary wants and thought, “Heck,
I want more than just these eight things!” Of course you do. We have
many other wants. We want to look good, and be healthy, well educated,
effective, and so on. (Don’t you?) These are called secondary, or learned
wants, and nine have been identified:
1. To be informed.
2. Curiosity.
3. Cleanliness of body and surroundings.
4. Efficiency.
5. Convenience.
6. Dependability/quality.
7. Expression of beauty and style.
8. Economy/profit.
9. Bargains.
These secondary wants are strong, but they don’t even come close
to the LF8. They’re way in the background, completely clouded by your
LF8 dust. We’re not born with these secondary wants. We learned them.
They’re not hard-wired in our brains as are the LF8. Used as tools of
influence, they’re not as bankable as the LF8 because we’re not biologically driven to satisfy them. (Read that again.) And when it comes to
human desires, biology is king. There’s nothing more powerful than
tapping into a desire that you can’t shake. It’s like jumping onto a speeding train: Once you’re on, you don’t need to lift a finger to get it moving—
you’re already flying along!
Think about it. Which desire would you respond to first: to buy a
new shirt, or to run out of a burning building? If you’re single, would
you be more driven to organize your desk or have amazing sex with the
hottie whose been flirting with you at lunch every day? Would you first

23

CA$HVERTISING
protect your spouse from a crazed attacker, or ignore the assault and
instead go shopping for wallpaper for your guest bathroom? The answers are obvious. And the interesting thing about the LF8 is that we
don’t even know—or ever question—these desires. We simply want
them—no, we must have them. We can’t shake them no matter what we
do. Again, they’re hardwired into us. These examples should give you a
better idea why the LF8 are so powerful, and why using them in your
ads can be so effective: You’ll be tapping into the human psyche, the
core programming of the human brain itself.
But what exactly is desire? It’s a type of tension you feel when a
need isn’t met. If you’re hungry, for example, the tension to eat arises
and the desire for food (LF8 #2) kicks in. If you see a creepy-looking
middle-aged guy chatting online with your 8-year-old daughter, the
tension to protect your child arises and your desire to start monitoring
her internet usage (LF8 #7) kicks in. If your office chair breaks your
back after just 10 minutes of use, the tension to be comfortable arises,
and your desire to buy a new chair (LF8 #5) kicks in.
So here’s the simple formula for desire, and the result it sets in motion:
Tension Æ Desire Æ Action to Satisfy the Desire
In short, when you appeal to people’s LF8 desires, you create a
drive that motivates them to take an action that will fulfill that desire as
soon as possible.
Now here’s an especially interesting fact, of particular importance
to us advertisers. Not only is it pleasant for us to satisfy our eight primary desires, but it’s also pleasant for us to read about how others have
satisfied them. It’s a form of vicarious LF8 desire fulfillment. Fascinating, isn’t it?
For example, by reading how consumer George Vincent was able to
pay off all his debts using a radical new approach to real estate investing, you and I—on the giant projector screen of our minds—envision a
brilliantly clear, superbly detailed account of ourselves paying off all our
bills, laughing as we dash off checks to our creditors in a devil-may-care
fashion, leaning back in our big leather chair, throwing our feet up on
our desk, and enjoying a debt-free, piles-of-cash-in-the-bank lifestyle.
Sounds great, doesn’t it? But did you see what I just did? By using
language that’s both specific and visual, I was able to install a mental
movie inside your head. We’ll explore these mental movies in more detail in Chapter 3, in Ad Agency Secret #18: Directing Mental Movies.

24

What People Really Want
But for now, just know that by using specific visual words, you can give
your audience a sense of what it’s like to actually interact with your
product or enjoy the benefits of your service—to demonstrate its use
inside their minds—long before they actually buy it. This vicarious pleasure is where the persuasion begins, because the first use of any product is
inside the consumers’ minds. (Stop. Read that last sentence again.) Imagining the use of something that appeals to you increases your desire for it.
For example, let’s say you love ice cream. If you spend all afternoon
thinking about ordering a giant hot fudge sundae at dinner with three
giant scoops of Guittard mint chocolate chip, two big ladles of steaming, extra-dark hot fudge, chopped wet nuts, all blanketed in a cloud of
fluffy whipped cream with a maraschino cherry on top, you’re naturally
going to want it more than if you hadn’t thought about it. And ultimately—
if that desire is strong enough—you’ll take some form of action that
results in your having mint chocolate chip ice cream, hot fudge, chopped
nuts, and a maraschino cherry floating around in your stomach. (And
perhaps some in your lap, too, if you’re particularly exuberant while
eating it.)
Again, notice how my choice of words causes you to imagine ice
cream, nuts, steaming-hot fudge and a bright red cherry floating in
your stomach. If I instead said, “you’ll take some form of action that
results in your having eaten it,” your mental movie screen would have—
POOF!—gone blank. And—this is critical—the less imagery you convey, the less your message occupies consumers’ brains, the less likely it
is that you’ll influence them. Let me drive this point home with another example.
Let’s look at transforming a bland sentence with no imagery power
into a Hollywood blockbuster. The bland sentence is: “Go somewhere
and do something.” Yawn. Each successive variation of this sentence
will build in visual intensity, not simply because we add words and sentences, but because the words I use are intentionally selected to install
mental movies—visuals—in your head.
✸ Go somewhere and do something. (This is a blank movie
screen. No imagery.)
✸ Go somewhere and get something. (Do can mean anything.
Get is more specific.)
✸ Go to the kitchen and get something. (Still vague, but now
you know where to go.)

25

CA$HVERTISING
✸ Go to the kitchen and get food. (Ahh, now we’re getting
somewhere. Do you see how filling in the details creates
imagery?)
✸ Go to the kitchen, open the oven, and get food. (Notice how
you pictured yourself opening an oven. Specific wording
implants images. Action words create moving pictures.)
✸ Go to the kitchen, open the oven, and pull out the pizza.
(Very visual. A picture of a pizza pops into your head,
whether you want it to or not! See the power of this? You
can’t help but picture what I write about, if I use specific
visual words.)
✸ Go to the kitchen, open the oven, and pull out the freshest,
crispiest, most delicious hot pizza you’ve ever eaten. Go
on, cut yourself a big, hearty slice. Careful, it’s hot! Now
take a big bite. Talk about crisp! The dough was made fresh
this morning and baked in a virgin olive oil–coated black
pan for a thick, deep-dish Chicago style crust. The sauce?
Prepared from scratch, of course, from juicy plum tomatoes picked this morning, and blended with select fresh
herbs from our own garden. Cheese? You betcha! Lots and
lots of chewy, whole-milk mozzarella, made from the finest
buffalo milk, of course, and the entire pie baked to bubbling perfection in a 750-degree wood-burning brick oven
imported from Genoa, Italy. (Okay, I really maxed out this
one to prove my point. And chances are you experienced a
rich and detailed series of images by simply reading my
words.)
We’ll talk more about this whole business of using positive visual
adjectives in Ad Agency Secret #17: PVAs—The Easy Way to Boost the
Power of Your Copy. But for now, to sum up this chapter, just be aware
of these five things:
1. People have eight basic wants—the LF8 (survival; food and
drink; freedom from fear, pain, and danger; sexual companionship; comfortable living conditions; to be superior;
care and protection of loved ones; and social approval).
2. The strongest advertising appeals are based on these eight
basic wants.

26

What People Really Want
3. The most effective way to create an appeal based on these
eight wants is to write ad copy that causes your prospects
to visually demonstrate your product or service inside their
heads, sufficiently enough to build desire for the satisfaction of the want(s) that your product promises to
provide...and then to choose your product to attain it.
4. Now that you’ve got them wanting fulfillment, your next
job is to influence them to believe that your product actually delivers what you say. It’s credibility time, and we’ll discuss this in Ad Agency Technique #15: The Psychology of
“Social Proof,” and Ad Agency Technique #33: Guarantees that Guarantee Higher Response.
5. They believe you. They want it. Yippee! Time to count your
money, right? Wrong! You now have to push them to act.
We’ll discuss how to do this in Ad Agency Technique #19:
Battling Human Inertia. And I’ll give you a slew of quick
tips in the following Chapter 4 Hot List sections: “22 Response Superchargers,” “13 Ways to Make Buying Easy,”
and “11 Ways to Boost Coupon Returns.”
Let’s now look at the 17 foundational principles of consumer psychology. In Chapter 2, I teach you what they are, why they work, and
how you can use them to help sell your products and services.

27

CHAPTER 2

How to Get Inside Their Heads:
The 17 Foundational Principles of
Consumer Psychology
Principle #1: The Fear Factor—
Selling the Scare
Fact: Your home is a cesspool filled with hundreds of strains of evil
bacteria waiting to infect your innocent child as he crawls along the
kitchen floor, sticking plastic toy blocks into his mouth. Don’t laugh.
Did you know that one single bacteria cell explodes into more than 8
million cells in less than 24 hours? And that invisible microbes of all
kinds can cause everything from athlete’s foot to diarrhea, the common
cold to the flu, meningitis, pneumonia, sinusitis, skin diseases, strep
throat, tuberculosis, urinary tract infections, and a lot more.
The solution? Lysol® Disinfectant Spray. It quickly kills 99.9 percent of germs on commonly touched surfaces throughout the home.
And it’s only about $5 a can.
Fact: No matter how often you wash your sheets, your bed is an
insect breeding ground, teeming with thousands of hideous, crab-like
dust mites aggressively laying eggs in your pillow and mattress, causing
you and your family to suffer year-long allergy attacks. While you sleep,
they actually wake up and start to crawl, eat your skin flakes, and drink
the moisture on your flesh. It gets worse. Did you know that 10 percent
of the weight of a two-year-old pillow is actually dead mites and their
feces? This means that every night you and your family are sleeping in

29

CA$HVERTISING
the equivalent of an insect’s toilet, actually covered in a mélange of both
their living and dead bodies, and oceans of their bitter excrement.
The solution? Bloxem® anti-mite mattress covers and pillow cases
help reduce allergy symptoms associated with dust mite infestation. The
special fabric’s tightly crafted pores don’t allow microscopic mites to
enter your mattress, nest, and breed. Your family enjoys a more peaceful night’s rest. And they’re so affordable: Bloxem anti-mite mattress
covers are just $60, and pillow cases are less than $10 each. They’re
available from dozens of fine Internet retailers.
Fact: Your dog could be the next victim of the horrible groomer’s
noose! This hangman-like contraption is designed to keep Fluffy on
the table while she’s getting her haircut. It’s perfectly safe—that is, if
she doesn’t step off the edge! One wrong step and she’d snap her neck
like an old-west bandit swinging from branches of the hangman’s tree.
The solution? Call Vanity ’n‘ Fur groomers, where we use loving
kindness to beautify your doggie, never dangerous mechanical
contraptions—like the groomer’s noose—that less-experienced groomers risk using everyday.
Bottom line: Fear sells. It motivates. It urges. It moves people to
action. It drives them to spend money. In fact, social psychologists and
consumer researchers have been studying its effects for more than 50
years. Whether it’s selling a loaf of bread, which hardly seems scary
(until you show them studies reporting that refined white flour may
cause cancer), or painting a picture of doom and gloom about the insidious nature of odorless carbon monoxide creeping through air conditioning vents and wiping out their family (while they’re sleeping safely
in a hotel on a business trip), properly constructed, fear can move people
to spend.
But why does it work? In a word: stress. Fear causes stress. And stress
causes the desire to do something. Missing a big sale causes the stress of
loss. Choosing the right tires can cause the stress of concern for personal safety. Not opting for the side-curtain airbags in your new car
causes the stress of future regret and visions of physical injury. Fear
suggests loss. Fear paints a picture of necessary response. It tells your
prospect that he or she will be somehow damaged. This threatens the
ego’s continuous quest for self-preservation. Therefore, the threat of
being damaged is insidious and powerful.
Can you use it for your products and services? Yes...if your product
offers the appropriate solution for a fearful situation. But is it ethical?

30

How to Get Inside Their Heads
Yes, but only if what you’re selling offers a truly effective solution.
Certain products can quell fears. And there’s nothing wrong with
promoting—and profiting—from them.
“Oh, Drew...that’s so manipulative! Scaring people to buy! How could
you?”
If you thought or said this statement, please read my Introduction
again. I said that if using persuasion and influence scares you, you should
stop reading. That’s because there aren’t enough pages in this book—
nor is it my intention—to try to convince you of the morality of using a
fear appeal. I mean, what could I possibly say to convince you that it’s
okay to use fear when selling your brake pad replacement service? (Isn’t
it obvious?) Or life insurance? Home smoke detectors? Cancer insurance? The mere mention of these things—to me, anyway—conjures up
fearful situations that require some form of self-protection. If that form
of self-protection presents itself via an advertiser who happens to be
selling a product that can save my life, prevent pain, or otherwise help
me better deal with an unpleasant situation, then I welcome it. I have
no problem being informed, and swiftly moved to take caution. Do you?
Bottom line: if it’s possible to use fear to effectively sell a product
or service, it means that inherent in that product or service is the possible resolution to that which is feared. If not, no matter how much fear
you try to conjure up, your appeal will fail miserably. Make sense?

The Four-Step Recipe for Inducing Fear
Okay, so you’ve determined that your product or service can genuinely alleviate a real fear-producing problem and is a good candidate for
using the fear appeal. In order to make it work, there’s a specific, fouringredient recipe you must follow.
In their study, Age of Propaganda (2001), Pratkanis and Aronson argue that, “the fear appeal is most effective when:
1. It scares the hell out of people.
2. It offers a specific recommendation for overcoming the
fear-aroused threat.
3. The recommended action is perceived as effective for
reducing the threat.
4. The message recipient believes that he or she can
perform the recommended action.”

31

CA$HVERTISING
The success or failure of this strategy relies on the existence of all
four components. Remove any one of them, and it’s like building your
own computer and leaving out the hard drive. No matter how much
you want it to work, it simply won’t compute!
What’s more, if you create too much fear, you could actually scare
someone to inaction, like a deer, staring frozen into the headlights of an
oncoming SUV. Fear can paralyze. And it will motivate your prospect to
act only if he believes he has the power to change his situation. That
means in order to craft an effective fear appeal, your ad must contain
specific, believable recommendations for reducing the threat that are both
credible and achievable.
For example, let’s say you own a karate school and you’re selling
self-defense training. You can teach people to walk even the roughest
streets with the confidence of a trained bodyguard, ready to counter
even the most vicious attacks by the scariest (and ugliest) thugs walking
the earth. Fact is, you need to do more than simply present gruesome
crime stats. You must also convince your prospect that it’s within her
ability—using your system—to fight off an attacker using her bare hands.
Ignore this vital step, and all you’ve accomplished is scaring her. You
must also convince her, using factors that boost credibility (testimonials,
video demonstrations, free lessons, and other believability boosters that
we’ll discuss later), and open her mind to the possibility that your claim
is true, and that she really can enjoy the benefits you’re promising. (She
wants to believe you, because you’re making an appealing claim. It’s
your job to help her believe you, and that takes more than simply shouting “boo!”)
The fear appeal is also more successful if the fears targeted are specific and widely recognized. It’s a lot easier to sell your sunscreen because
everyone knows the sun can fry you like bacon and turn your skin into a
melanoma factory. It’s much tougher to sell laundry detergent that helps
prevent ultraviolet damage to clothing. Why? Because few people are
concerned with UV laundry damage. When’s the last time this issue
kept you awake? Although the fear is specific (damage to clothing), it’s
certainly not widely recognized.
Listen: Your goal is not to create new fears, but to tap into existing
fears, either those on the forefront of consumers’ minds, or those that
require a little digging to uncover.
For example, take what I affectionately call “germ gel.” You may
know it as Purell Instant Hand Sanitizer, the leading brand. I don’t go

32

How to Get Inside Their Heads
anywhere without it. In fact, if I leave the house and forget my small
bottle, I’m thrown into somewhat of a panic. Why is this? GOJO Industries—
the company that manufactures the germ-quashing goop—first introduced Purell to the food service and healthcare industries in 1988.
Thinking back to that time—and even before—I don’t recall ever feeling creeped out about touching things in public the way I do today.
Sure, I was always health conscious; I always washed my hands before
eating, and throughout the day as needed. I knew germs existed everywhere. And yet, the “need” to keep my hands relatively germ-free was
simply not a concern back then. It wasn’t on the forefront of my mind.
Jump ahead to 1997, when Purell hit the consumer market. Aha!
Did you know that unwashed hands are the leading cause of food contamination in restaurants? Hand-washing? What a joke! A 2003 survey
sponsored by the American Society of Microbiology (ASM) found that
many people passing through major U.S. airports don’t wash their hands
after using the public facilities. More than 30 percent of people using
restrooms in New York airports, 19 percent of those in Miami’s airport,
and 27 percent of air travelers at Chicago’s O’Hare aren’t stopping to
wash their hands. In a phone survey the same year conducted by
Wirthlin Worldwide, only 58 percent of people say they wash their hands
after sneezing or coughing, and only 77 percent say they wash their
hands after changing a diaper.
In 1972, the Journal of the American Medical Association described
a study wherein they cultured bacteria from 200 coins and bills and
found fecal bacteria and Staphylococcus aureus on 13 percent of coins
and 42 percent of notes. It concluded: “Money is truly dirty.” Heck,
visit Purell.com and you’ll see their list of “99.99 Germy Reasons to Use
Purell.”
Listerine created a shockwave of paranoia with the distasteful word
halitosis in 1900. The copywriter for antiperspirant Odorno (what a name!)
caused ladies to question their “daintiness” with a groundbreaking headline in the 1919 Ladies Home Journal that read, “In the Curve of a
Woman’s Arm.” GOJO did the same for bacteria. They made it an issue.
Something to think—and fret—about. They instilled fear. And, as a
result, Listerine now boasts an impressive 53 percent market share.
Odorno boosted sales 112 percent using that poetic headline (despite
causing 200 women to cancel their subscriptions out of sheer disgust with
the suggestion that they’d need such a product). And today, GOJO’s Purell
is the largest-selling brand of instant hand sanitizer, causing countless

33

CA$HVERTISING
germaphobes to carry the stuff around in their handy travel bottle holders that attach conveniently to their key chains. (See how they made it
easy to resolve the fear?)
A common way fear is used to simulate action is via the use of deadlines and scarcity. Phrases and slogans such as limited offer, one-day sale,
and while supplies last have the effect of scaring consumers into believing that unless they act now, they’ll miss a fantastic opportunity to save
money, tapping into Human Secondary Want #9. The deadline tactic
follows the guidelines by offering the consumer the means to address
the “threat” by rushing out to purchase before it’s too late.
However, fear is not a magical wand. It’s not enough to simply scare
someone, say a few nice things about your product, and sit back and
wait for an onslaught of orders. Fear is simply one way to motivate your
prospects to investigate your product further. Get it? You still need to
convince him that your product provides the solution to the fear you just
instilled. You still need to persuade and motivate him to take action: to
grab his wallet, visit your Website, or call your 800 number and place
his order. Don’t fret! I’ll teach you how to do all these things—and much
more—in Chapter 3, where we discuss 41 advertising-specific techniques
that incorporate many of the psychological principles we’re now reviewing.

Principle #2: Ego Morphing—
Instant Identification
When you see the Marlboro man, it’s your ego—not your craving for
paper tubes stuffed with tobacco—that motivates you to switch brands.
When you see the Victoria’s Secret models with their long, silky hair
and piercing eyes slinking around in their lacy undergarments, it’s your
ego, not your admiration for the directorial style of the commercial, that
motivates you to buy the slinkwear.
The fact is, you can blame your ego for many of your high credit
card bills.
The foundation for Ego Morphing and the Vanity Appeal was described by Pratkanis and Aronson (Age of Propaganda, 1991), when they
said, “By purchasing the ‘right stuff,’ we [the consumer] enhance our
own egos and rationalize away our inadequacies.”
Imagine that! We can actually buy things to make up for what we
believe is a lacking in our personalities. You’ve heard of retail therapy,
right? Could it be that we as advertisers are actually performing a

34

How to Get Inside Their Heads
function more vital than simply providing people with goods and services? Could it be that we’re actually assisting in our customers’ psychological development as well?
In reality, this technique allows you to create a certain image, or
identity, for a product, in order to appeal to a particular section of the
audience that feels that their personal image and ego either match it or
could be improved by it.
Your goal is to cause consumers to become so closely associated
with the product’s image that it almost becomes a part of their own
identity; thus, you’re “morphing” their ego to fit your product. By representing your product through carefully chosen images and personalities, you can persuade your prospects that, by purchasing or using your
wares, they’ll immediately become associated with these images and
attitudes.
Persuading this way is not difficult. You don’t have to work hard to
persuade a woman to want to be sexier and more in control, or for a
man to be more powerful, self-confident, and appealing to women. These
things are built in, pre-wired into our very being. And because the majority of true prospects for your product already believe they possess the
ideas and values associated with it—or have the desire to develop them
(otherwise they wouldn’t be true prospects)—you’re actually tapping
into this pre-wiring. Don’t you see? You’re selling an easy route to fulfill
what we know they already want more of. And for those who believe they
already have it, our product can help them too, by giving them a way to
express what they feel about themselves to the outside world.
What does all this mean? Simply that you can appeal to your
audience’s vanity and ego without the need for persuasive ideas or evidence by concentrating on showing your prospects the images they
want to see. For example, start noticing how very little persuasive copy
is used in ads for luxury goods. They’re “feel good” ads. They present
an image that’s carefully crafted to evoke the emotional response of
desire—for the item advertised. Here’s an example of the elaborate and
complex purchase decision pattern when such an ad is viewed by a true
prospect:
“Oooooh, look at these hot-looking girls climbing all over that guy
wearing those kewl Hollister jeans. I want those jeans.”
Don’t laugh. That’s about it all it takes. And if it didn’t work, retailers such as Hollister and Abercrombie & Fitch wouldn’t be spending
a fortune placing such ads. (Nor would Lexus, BMW, Jaguar, and

35

CA$HVERTISING
high-end-product advertisers of most every kind. Oh, did I mention
Rolls-Royce? Yeah, them too.)
Does it work? Consider the perfume and cologne business. Aside
from impregnating paper flaps with their product so people can take a
whiff, the only thing these advertisers do to persuade their prospects to
buy is show photos of hot-looking women and men whom we’re supposed to believe are customers. The models aren’t even wearing the
perfumes and colognes during the photo shoot! So really, 99.9 percent
of the ad has nothing to do with the products being promoted. It’s pure
imagery. But manufacturers apparently know it works: 2008 cologne
sales are expected to reach $1.6 billion. Women’s fragrances? Add another $3.2 billion.
Appealing to people’s vanity and ego is most successful when it
hones in on characteristics that society considers being desirable, such
as physical attractiveness, intelligence, economic success, and sexual
prowess. As suggested by Stec and Bernstein’s Balance Theory (1999), if
consumers are presented with the “correct” images, people who possess these characteristics will buy them in order to publicize their ego.
Those who don’t will purchase them in an attempt to appear as if they
do. Interesting, isn’t it?
So think about your product. Does owning or using it suggest qualities that people would want to flaunt? You own a karate school? Then
spotlight the names of the big mixed martial arts stars who work out
there. Then print and sell T-shirts that say “I train with [insert bigname star here].” Instant ego appeal.
You’re the most expensive dog groomer in town? Show photos of
the rich celebrities who bring in their pooches. Feature Mr. or Ms. Celeb
stepping out of a limo with a drooling pooch. “Oh, yes...there are plenty
of other groomers in town, but pshaw! I only trust the Karringtons with
my Fluffy.” So snotty, but—BOOM!—instant ego appeal.
You’re a printer specializing in high-end stationery and wedding
invitations? Brag about the well-known personalities who’ve used your
services. Huh? You say there are no well-known personalities who’ve
used your services? That’s an easy fix. Offer to do a free job for a few of
your favorite local celebs—newscasters, or social and political leaders,
for example. When they accept, send them 250 letterheads and envelopes on your finest paper...then drop some names as to whose stationery you’ve printed. Voila! Instant ego appeal.

36

How to Get Inside Their Heads
You’re a security firm? What big companies (that have far more rigorous security requirements than your typical prospect) trust you to
protect them? Say, “Why Do More Local Bank Presidents Choose
FortKnox Security to Protect Their Own Homes Than Anyone Else?”
And then, the variation: “Why Do More Local Jewelry Store Owners
Choose FortKnox Security to Protect Their Homes Than Anyone Else?”
Get it? If bank presidents and jewelry store owners trust you to protect their family and their biggest investment (their home), then, as the
average prospect, I’d feel good about hiring you to secure my modest
home. Doing so puts me in the company of these discerning executives. Again, instant ego appeal.
Back to Rolls-Royce.
Question: Would such a distinguished British automaker—long
before they were gobbled up by BMW and Volkswagen—stoop to engaging in such a “manipulative” ploy?
Answer: Is a bullfrog waterproof?
Imagine a full-page magazine ad consisting of little more than one
large photo of what looks like a Manhattan intersection. From our bird’seye view, we see a driver patiently waiting for the light to change. The
ridiculously shiny black convertible Rolls-Royce with Sir Charles Sykes’s
internationally recognized silvery winged mascot, “The Spirit of Ecstasy,”
declares the owner’s good taste and insistence on excellence. Well dressed
in business attire, he appears to be about 55 years old, salt-and-pepper
hair, confident and relaxed, an executive of some type, no doubt, thinking a myriad of “all is right with the world”-type thoughts, staring straight
ahead. To the left of his car, we see another driver of about the same
age, the entire weight of his head resting in his left hand, looking enviously at the driver in the Rolls. Feeling on top of the world just moments before Mr. RR pulled up, he’s now squirming uncomfortably...in
his Mercedes. Match point, game over.
Not all businesses can use such an ego-driven approach. The nature of all products and services doesn’t dictate such a prescription.
Fret not. There are plenty of other techniques that will fit your product
or service just fine.
Like a sharpshooter peering through a rifle scope, the techniques
we’ve discussed so far target your prospects’ internal attitudes and innate psychological hot buttons. The following technique influences
consumer behavior by associating products and services with symbols
of authority or reverence.

37

CA$HVERTISING

Principle #3: Transfer—Credibility by Osmosis
“I don’t understand!” shouted the advertiser. “That’s the best
damned ad I’ve ever written! Look at that beautiful layout! Look at that
gorgeous photo! My price is right and I make it easy for people to order.
This newspaper has an excellent circulation so I know I’m reaching my
audience. And,” he continues, “it’s a product that would really help
people! So why isn’t anyone ordering?”
The problem? Nobody believes him.
That’s right. No matter how wonderful your ad, brochure, sales letter, Web page, e-mail, or radio or TV commercial, if your prospects don’t
believe you, you’ve flushed your ad money down the toilet. Your offer
must be credible, or you should expect the same crummy results as our
frustrated advertiser friend here.
Transfer is a strategy that involves using symbols, images, or ideas—
cues, if you will—commonly associated with people, groups, or institutions of authority or respect, in order to persuade your prospect that
your product or service is in some way acceptably endorsed. And if
something is endorsed by a person or group you respect, lights flash,
bells ring, your brain spits out “instant credibility!” And if it’s something you want and can afford, you’ll start digging for your Visa card.
Socialization ensures that most people respect institutions such as
the Church, the medical establishment, national agencies, and science.
When you incorporate images or symbols from any of these groups into
your ads, the trust you gain can offset your need to present as rigorous
a persuasive argument. The ideal strategy? Get a respected institution
to provide its official endorsement. Doing so instantly transfers their
authority, sanction, and prestige to your product or service.
For example, let’s say you’re not sure which way to vote on a costly
new crime bill that’s up on referendum. It sounds good, but you don’t
know if it’ll really make a difference on the street, where it matters most.
Alas, a direct mail flyer from the Fraternal Order of Police lands in your
mailbox. It says that they wholeheartedly support the bill and request
your support in urging your state and local politicians to vote yes on its
passage. Because you’ve always respected the organization, and even
donated a few bucks to it, you’re now far more likely to support the
cause. “If the police like it,” you reason, “it’s good enough for me.” And
you’re also likely to think—consciously or otherwise—“I respect the F.O.P.
so I’m sure they’ve checked it out thoroughly. I’ll vote yes.”

38

How to Get Inside Their Heads
Did you see what happened? Human inertia, a metaphor for laziness, leads you to rationalize not doing your own in-depth research. It’s
as simple as that.
Proactiv is just one of dozens of acne products being hawked today.
However, it’s the only one featuring singer Jessica Simpson testifying to
its effectiveness. To young girls suffering from the skin condition, this
is all the endorsement they need.
Quaker Oats enjoyed excellent growth of its product ever since it
trademarked its first smiling Quaker man logo back in 1877. Unfortunately, 113 years later, in 1990, the New England Journal of Medicine released the controversial Sachs study that disputed claims that oats and
oat bran could reduce cholesterol. Fortunately, Quaker had already
launched a new campaign featuring actor Wilford Brimley in 1987. His
disarming, down-to-earth straight talk and no-nonsense, “high-credibility
demeanor” proclaimed the virtues of the flattened oats, and Quaker
enjoyed a reversal of a 5-year sales decline.
If you can’t get a full endorsement—a testimonial, for example—
you can achieve similar success by spotlighting readily recognized symbols that carry the weight of endorsement.
Consider the Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval. This unassuming oval has instilled pre-purchase confidence in millions of consumers
since 1909. A clever concept, the seal is awarded only to those products
whose ads have been reviewed and accepted for publication in Good
Housekeeping magazine. The publisher promises a refund or replacement for defective products within two years of purchase. Not only is this
a great added-value inducement to buy ad space in Good Housekeeping,
but it’s also an ideal example of how a trusted group’s symbol can give
your prospect a sense of security before whipping out the cash. Just as
any other guarantee, it could actually help you close the sale if you
construct it properly. (More about guarantees later.)
I recently created a jumbo postcard for a hypnotist client. His prospects aren’t familiar with any hypnosis-industry organizations, but the
mere addition of the official-looking logo of the National Guild of Hypnotists
is enough to suggest that my client’s membership in the organization
suggests the validity of his credentials, experience, and effectiveness. Now
think. Do they really mean any of that? Of course not. Your prospects
often use a peripheral, or noncritical style of thinking. It’s this same “shortcut to persuasion” at work when we use symbols that connote—or denote—
authority, agreement, acceptance, or recognition. Interestingly enough, I

39

CA$HVERTISING
bet not 1 in 100 people who received my client’s postcard had ever
heard of the National Guild of Hypnotists. But thanks to the peripheral
route to persuasion, it doesn’t matter. It’s all most consumers need for
the added boost of confidence they need.
To simplify, here’s what happens. Your prospects: 1) See a symbol of
credibility (logo, endorsement, and the like), and then (2) question less
of your sales argument.
Using generally accepted images of medical and scientific authority
could also produce the transfer effect. Studies performed by the Institute
for Propaganda Analysis suggest that from the simple image of an “expert” in a white lab coat showing medical stats, advertisers can tap the
public’s acceptance of physicians to influence consumer behavior, either for or against a product. Is it any wonder that so many ads for
health products feature dignified-looking men in white lab jackets? Instant credibility! These advertisers know that you’ll likely transfer your
feelings about physicians to their product. It’s a predictable one-two
punch that works most every time.
“Okay Drew, enough examples. What do I do with this info?”
Simple. Think about which person, persons, and organizations in
your industry have a reputation that carries sufficient respect that if
you got them to endorse your business, product, or service, you could
capitalize on the transfer of credibility it would create. For specifics about
how to do this, see Ad Agency Technique #15: The Psychology of Social
Proof, later in this book.
As the transfer technique shows, strategies that appeal to a broad
range of the population can be highly successful. Next, let’s explore a
technique of group persuasion.

Principle #4: The Bandwagon Effect—
Give Them Something to Jump On
Fact: Humans are social beings with a powerful psychological need
to belong.
Long ago, our ancestors understood that, in order to maximize their
chances for survival, it was in their best interests to form groups of likeminded individuals. So they lived in groups, hunted in groups, protected each other in groups. Everyone had a vital role that contributed
to the success of the entire tribe. When the group ate, you ate. When it
slept, you slept. When it packed up and moved, you moved. If it
died...well, you get the picture.

40

How to Get Inside Their Heads
Although modern societies no longer live this way, membership in—
and identification with—some group is still critically important for our
happiness. We have a need for friends, a romantic relationship, and,
ultimately, marriage and children. We join social clubs, fraternities, and
sororities; participate in community events; attend religious services;
and form business organizations and even street gangs. Heck, we often
wear shirts and caps proclaiming our associations, which makes us feel
accepted, valuable, and important.
In fact, according to psychologist Abraham Maslow’s well-known
Hierarchy of Human Needs pyramid, the need to belong is third only
to our physiological needs (food, clothing, and shelter) and our safety
needs (security, stability, and freedom from fear). Once these first two
needs have been satisfied, belonging or love—which is usually found
within families, friendships, membership in associations, and within
our community—becomes a top priority. It’s another LF8 need that’s
hard-wired in us. And it’s yet another handle the savvy advertiser can
grip in order to persuade.

Three Types of Groups
Psychologists tell us there are three primary types of groups, regardless of the group’s purpose:
1. Aspirational—Groups to which you’d like to belong.
2. Associative—Groups that share your ideals and values.
3. Dissociative—Groups to which you do not want to belong.
By linking products and services to any of these three reference
groups, you can persuade your prospects to make decisions based upon
the group with which they identify, or want to identify.
This strategy uses the peripheral—superficial thought—route to persuasion. (Remember we discussed this earlier?) That’s because the
consumer’s purchase is based primarily on his or her sense of belonging, and not entirely on the merits of your product. The need for group
membership is a strong psychological drive, and in its pursuit, most
consumers will forego the need for an active, deep analysis of what you’re
selling. Aha! We’ve found yet another shortcut to persuasion.
And it’s more than just something that just sounds good. It’s backed
by sound research. Stec and Bernstein (1999) support this strategy with
their Consensus-Implies-Correctness heuristic, which claims that this
psychological concept causes a “bandwagon” effect, which ensures that

41

CA$HVERTISING
if a large enough group holds a favorable opinion about a product, then
that opinion must be correct. We’ll discuss this finding in Principle #17.
But to which group do you attempt to link your prospects? Here’s a
rule of thumb: If seeking aspirational group influence—people your
prospects aspire to be similar to—you must make sure your prospects
can easily identify with them.
For example: Let’s say you’re selling a new style of bicycle seat for
racing enthusiasts that feels as though you’re floating on a cushion of
air, rather than sitting on an agonizing platform of blunt, chisel-tip
pallet nails. Research tells you that the median age of your target market is 34 years. This immediately tells you that it wouldn’t be wise to
feature a bunch of old men or women in your ad. You also don’t want to
show casual “Everyday Joe” riders on their way to a family picnic lunch.
Likewise, your main photo shouldn’t be of an unknown bicycler—even
if he or she is your best customer who happens to spend $1,000 in parts
and service every month.
Why? Well, remember the group label aspirational? These simply
aren’t the people your hardcore group aspires to emulate. Your audience
doesn’t want to be the guy or gal next door. They aspire to be similar to
tour-winning legends Lance Armstrong, Miguel Indurain, or Eddy
Merckx—three of the best cyclists of all time. Featuring pros such as
these encourages your prospects to believe that, by using your cushysoft seat, they can be more similar to their two-wheeled heroes.
Successfully gaining associative group influence is more complex.
This strategy requires that you link your product to a certain societal
group, while often alienating others. This can be done in two ways,
either by (1) closely associating your product with the target group
through advertising that specifically appeals to the attitudes and values
of that group, or by (2) disassociating your product from other groups
within society, in order to make it appear more accepted, or, in the cases
of younger audiences, simply more “cool.”
The teenage clothing industry successfully uses both methods, with
some advertising directly urging kids to belong to the “youth culture,”
while other advertising urges them to reject the culture of the “oldies.”
For example, in 1969, clothing retailer the Gap flung open its doors
in San Francisco, and its very name suggested “generation gap,” and
that the items inside are unlike those your parents are wearing. Currently with 3,100 stores—including Banana Republic, Old Navy, and

42

How to Get Inside Their Heads
Piperlime—and 2007 revenues of more than $15.8 billion, the associativedissociative strategy apparently worked.
The bandwagon appeal has worked for scores of companies, including:
✸ Walgreens: “The pharmacy America trusts.”
✸ Jif Peanut Butter: “Choosy moms choose Jif ” (Don’t you
want to be a choosy parent too?)
✸ Eucerin: “The #1 dermatologist-recommended brand
for dry skin.”
✸ British Airways: “The world’s favorite airline.”
✸ Glacial Water: “The #1 brand in vended water.”
✸ Mr. Heater: “America’s most popular brand of portable
heaters.”
✸ Camels: “More doctors smoke Camels than any other
cigarette.” (Ugh.)
✸ Rinso: “Who else wants a whiter wash—with no hard
work?”
You can successfully appeal to your prospects’ desire to belong in
several categories: age, class, sex, geographic, politics, and education,
for example. As supported by Cialdini’s studies of comparison cues (Influence: Science and Practice, 1980), by associating your products and
services with one or more of these groups, you can successfully persuade an entire category of the public to immediately identify with the
attitudes and values of that group, and compel them to purchase your
product as a way of showing the world that they now belong to that
group. Fascinating, this “psychology stuff,” isn’t it?
Think. Does your product lend itself to using the human need to belong appeal? If it does, don’t just think about ways to describe its features and benefits. Put at least equal effort into telling your prospects
how buying your product makes them (aspirational), keeps them (associative), or helps them show the world that they’re not a part of a particular group (dissociative).
But before your prospects are willing to buy anything, they must first
be motivated enough to do so! The next technique is based upon one
of the classic psychological theories of motivation.

43

CA$HVERTISING

Principle #5: The Means-End Chain—
The Critical Core
“Don’t buy my product for what it does for you today—buy it for
what it will do for you tomorrow!”
That’s what this principle says. And the strategy is based on the
theory that many consumer decisions are taken not to satisfy an immediate need, but for some future objective. For Joe, your buyer, the product,
or service he purchased is merely a means to an end.
Luxury goods and services are often advertised using the Means-End
Chain. The strategy is to persuade your prospects that your product—
although desirable in its own right—will provide additional secondary
benefits to them or their family.
For example, buying flowers, chocolates, or sexy undergarments as
a gift for a partner suggests the possibility of enjoying secondary benefits, doesn’t it?
Buying a new car is a wonderful feeling, right? “Forget about that!”
Mr. Lexus Salesman tells you. “Because as a realtor, buying that hot new
Lexus will make you look more successful to your homebuyers, and
they’ll be far more likely to list their houses with you. They’ll think, ‘She
must be selling homes...how else could she afford that new Lexus?’”
As the advertiser, your goal is obviously to sell your product or service. Using the Means-End Chain, you simply do it by shifting the
consumer’s focus to your product’s ultimate value or benefit. I call it the
“benefit of the benefit.”
To drive the point home, I ask my CA$HVERTISING seminar audiences, “Why should I buy a window sign for my new retail business?
Tell me the core benefit of doing so.” And here’s how the interaction
usually goes:
AUDIENCE: “The sign tells people who you are.”
ME: “Okay, but what’s the benefit of telling people who
I am?”
AUDIENCE: “So they’ll do business with you.”
ME: “True, but what’s the benefit of people doing business with me?”
AUDIENCE: “So you can sell your products, of course!”

44

How to Get Inside Their Heads
ME: “Of course. But what’s the benefit of me selling my
products?”
(And finally, after pulling a few more teeth, someone finally shouts...)
AUDIENCE: “So you can make money!”
Hallelujah!
The formula for activating the Means-End Chain mindset is simple.
Your copy and images should always represent the positive end results.
In this way your prospect is less likely to critically analyze the pros and
cons of the actual product, and base their purchase decision on the
ultimate benefit it will provide them.
What’s the core benefit of your product or service? If you sell shovels, you must understand that people don’t want a long pole with a flat
piece of attached metal. They do want the holes so they can plant beautiful trees and colorful flowers and make their homes look more attractive!
If you sell microwave ovens, people don’t want the big, clunky electrical box with all the fancy buttons and the spinning glass plate. They
do want to be able to cook and eat quickly so they have more time for
other things.
Cars? The nice paint, smooth-running engine, and supple leather
sure make them fun to drive, but getting from point A to point B is why
people really buy them. The ego appeal is icing on the cake.
Just remember, for most products, it’s not the product itself that
people want, it’s the bottom-line benefit they’re buying. If people could
snap their fingers and magically have a hole appear in the ground, you’d
be out of the shovel business. If they could cook their food in seconds
by wiggling their nose, bye-bye Microwave Warehouse. And chances are
if you could teleport yourself from point A to point B like Mr. Spock on
Star Trek, auto malls and gas stations would be converted into drug
stores and condos.
But no matter what you sell, the major difficulty with persuading
consumers is dealing with their varying degrees of product knowledge.
The following technique uses these differences to its advantage.

45

CA$HVERTISING

Principle #6: The Transtheoretical Model—
Persuasion Step by Step
If you don’t know what a hamburger is, I’m going to have a heck of
a time trying to sell you my new “Bloopo Burger,” no matter how fresh
the beef, fluffy the bun, and tangy the secret sauce may be.
The Transtheoretical Model (TTM) divides consumer knowledge and
behavior into five stages, and it provides the guidelines for persuading
your prospect so they move from complete ignorance of your product
(“What the heck is this?”), to making it a regular purchase or an integral
part of their lifestyles (“Doesn’t everyone buy this?”). When you’re aware
of these stages, you’ll better understand how and where to begin your
sales message.
Here are the stages, in a quick and easy nutshell.
✸ STAGE ONE: Precontemplation—People in this stage are
either ignorant of your product’s existence—“What the
heck is a Bloopo Burger?”—or they’re unaware they need it.
✸ STAGE TWO: Contemplation—Prospects in this stage are
aware of your product and have thought about using it.
“Hmmm...I should check out those Bloopo Burgers
someday.”
✸ STAGE THREE: Preparation—This is the planning
phase. Your prospect is thinking about buying from you,
but needs more information about your product’s
benefits and advantages. “I’d like to buy a Bloopo
Burger...it sure looks good, but what the heck is in it? Is it
healthier? Better tasting? What’s it cost?”
✸ STAGE FOUR: Action—Success! Your prospect has
arrived at the coveted action, or purchase phase. “Here’s
my credit card, gimme my damned Bloopo!”
✸ STAGE FIVE: Maintenance—A nice place for your
prospects to be. In this phase, your product has become
part of their everyday lives. They continue to buy your
Bloopos without giving it a second thought. It’s their
burger of choice. Simply put, when they want a burger,
they buy a Bloopo.
According to the evidence provided by psychologist James O.
Prochaska (1994), the aim for advertisers who use this technique is to

46

How to Get Inside Their Heads
move the consumer through the stages one at a time, until using your
product becomes a habit. The challenge? Dealing successfully with consumer groups at different stages of the process. Some of your prospects
are in stage one, while others wouldn’t think of eating any other burger,
in stage five. You have two options to tackle this:
1. Create ads that address all five stages. This lets your
prospects focus on whatever stage is personally relevant
to them. Simply include all the details someone would
need to be fully informed about a product they might
know little, if anything, about.
2. Create a series of ads that, throughout a period of time,
progress from stage one to stage five. Stage one, therefore,
introduces your product to the marketplace. Each
successive ad builds upon the last, and can begin
highlighting key features and benefits.
The objective of both strategies, of course, is to provide your prospects with enough information and motivation to move them through
the five stages at their own pace, until they ultimately become regular
customers.
No doubt about it. It’s far easier to reinforce existing consumer attitudes and behavior than to change those values. The next strategy recognizes this fact and uses it to cement your customers’ loyalty.

Principle #7: The Inoculation Theory—
Make Them Prefer You for Life
When German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche wrote, “What does
not kill me makes me stronger,” he could have been talking about this
next principle of consumer persuasion.
Inoculation Theory works in much the same way as a vaccination
you’d get to prevent the flu. Let me explain. A vaccine consists of a
virus that’s weakened using a process called cell culture adaptation. The
virus is grown in chicken embryo cells, which changes the genes that
tell the virus how to reproduce. This causes the virus to reproduce poorly
in the human body. When injected into your arm, however, your body
reacts as if the virus was full strength, and quickly attacks and kills it. In
doing so—and this is the important part—your body actually becomes stronger, resistant to that specific virus, for the rest of your life.

47

CA$HVERTISING
The Inoculation Theory works in a similar way. Developed by social
psychologist and Yale professor William J. McGuire, the Inoculation
Theory is used to reinforce a consumer’s existing attitudes toward a
product or service by presenting a “weak” argument that tricks the consumer into defending his position and therefore strengthening his attitude. The three steps are:
1. Warn of an impending attack.
2. Make a weak attack.
3. Encourage a strong defense.
For example, let’s say you and I are pastry chefs, and we work together in a bakery turning out the richest, fluffiest, and most amazing
chocolate desserts known to man. Your chocolate brand of choice is
Guittard, a California-based company whose world-class chocolate is
used by many of the most prominent pastry chefs and confectionary
shops in the U.S. and abroad. And let’s say that I just found out that
our boss—Nasty Norman—wants to start using a cheaper (crap) brand.
Since ol’ Norm loves to fire employees who disagree with him, I
figured that I’d get you to fight the chocolate war. Heck, why risk my
job? The plan: inoculate you. First, according to the strategy, I’d warn
you of an impending attack to ready your defenses and get your mind
swirling with possible counterattacks. I might say, “Hey, did you hear
that Nasty Norm is thinking about buying crappy ChocoWax instead of
Guittard to save a few pennies?”
Next, I’d light a fire under you seat with some weak arguments for
ChocoWax. For example, “Come to think of it, maybe we could get away
with using ChocoWax by adding a little extra cocoa to our recipes.”
And, “I wonder if people would really taste the difference. After all,
most of our competitors use the el crappo chocolate.” (That will really
fire you up!)
And finally, I’d encourage you to mount a strong defense by getting
you to verbally express what you’re thinking, rather than keeping your
thoughts to yourself. “So...what do you think?” Psychological testing
shows that the more actively the recipient defends against the attack,
the more vigorously he or she will defend the closely held position.
By attacking your ideas and decisions (or brand preferences, as in
this example), inoculation encourages you to use critical thought to
defend them. Basically, it tricks you into thinking more deeply about
your own position, which reinforces your thoughts and feelings. That’s

48

How to Get Inside Their Heads
because, in an effort to prepare yourself for the impending attack you
were warned about in step one (“Norm’s going to buy ChocoWax!”),
you’ve begun to plan your counterattack and sharpen your defenses,
so when the real attack (from Norm) comes, you’ll be prepared to tell
him where to put his cheap choc.
Important: Consumer psychologists warn that your attack must be
weak. Otherwise you risk having the opposite effect and weakening, or
changing your prospects’ attitudes. One way advertisers use inoculation is by publicizing their competitors’ criticisms of their company,
and turning them to their advantage in the form of weak attacks that—
thanks to the Inoculation Theory—serve to reinforce and ensure their
consumers’ loyalty.
Inoculation is a favorite among politicians. Their stock line goes
this way: “My opponent will tell you there’s no way to bring down skyrocketing oil prices...he’ll tell you that the only way to balance the national
budget is to raise your taxes...he’ll tell you that it’s good enough to provide health insurance for most citizens, not all of them. But I tell you
this is definitely not the case, and here is why....”
Do you see what’s happening? This candidate is inoculating his
audience by (1) warning them of an impending attack, (2) presenting
the weak arguments his opponent will say during the campaign, and
(3) encouraging a strong defense by giving them a little ammunition to
help prepare for battle.
An auto body shop might take aim at the competition by adopting a
consumer-advocate-type position by telling prospects to be wary when
getting quotes from competitors: “Our competitors will tell you that the
little dent in your fender costs over $1,000 to fix. They’ll quote you $800
to replace your windshield because of that tiny chip in the glass. What
they won’t tell you is there are many ‘insider’ secrets in our business for
getting these jobs done for a fraction of the cost. For example....”
So how can you quash your competitors’ sales arguments by launching a preemptive strike using the Inoculation Theory? The key is to
prep them in such a way so that your prospects process your competitors’ claims though your filters! Like the auto body shop owner in the
last example, tell them what to look out for; what’s good; what’s bad;
what’s suspect. Doing so implies that you’re so confident in what you
sell that you’re inviting closer inspection. You want them to compare!
And I don’t use the term consumer advocate lightly. The fact is, if
you’re providing legitimate information—and I trust you are—then your

49

CA$HVERTISING
advertising becomes more than just another business shouting “Me!
Me! Me! Buy from ME!” You’re actually providing a helpful service
that—assuming your product or service is truly better—will translate
into additional business and tremendous public goodwill.
Are you a pizza shop? “Our competitors tell you they use fresh mozzarella, but they don’t tell you they buy it pre-shredded in big plastic bags. At
Pauley’s Pizza, we hand-shred our mozzarella every morning. Our competitors offer you a choice of thin and crispy or deep dish Sicilian, but
they don’t tell you that they buy their dough in hard frozen balls and thaw
it out the night before. At Pauley’s Pizza, we make our dough fresh
every single day. Our competitors tell you how convenient their home delivery service is, but they don’t tell you that their average delivery time is
over an hour. Pauley’s Pizza delivers in 28 minutes or your pizza is free.”
Ads similar to these create more critical consumers that are predisposed to your products. This “Ralph Nadar approach” builds great
trust and credibility. Take a real hard look at what you’re selling. What
do you do better, faster, easier? Inoculate your prospects by bringing
these advantages to light and watch how you’ll win them over.

Principle #8: Belief Re-ranking—
Change Their Reality
Let’s face it: Most people don’t like change. As impervious as bullfrogs are to water, human beings are to doing things differently. It’s
tough enough to get people to change small physical things about themselves: the way they dress, their hairstyle, the way they work, the way
they speak. Trying to get them to change their beliefs about life? Ugh!
You see, psychologists know that even if our beliefs are inaccurate or
inconsistent—even if we ourselves know they are—we’ll still defend them
as if their existence is somehow linked to our very survival! Link anything to survival—and that’s exactly what the ego does, by the way—
and you’re up against a brutally tough opponent.
Fortunately, there are ways to change people’s beliefs about your
product, the primary belief being that they don’t want or need it! One of
the most effective of these methods works by switching the focus away
from the attitudes themselves and onto the underlying beliefs.

50

How to Get Inside Their Heads

Change the Focus of the Beliefs
In order to influence beliefs, advertisers use images and statistics
that appeal either to emotions, such as fear, humor, or guilt (affecting
the right-hemisphere, creative brain), or to the consumer’s intellect,
through factual evidence and examples (affecting the left-hemisphere,
logical brain). When you do this, you present your audience with an
alternative view of reality—one that’s not supported by their currently
held beliefs. In other words, you might feel a certain way about a product, but your beliefs can be changed if you’re given new ways to think
about it.

The Baking Soda Blues
For example, let’s say you love baking soda toothpaste because you
read somewhere that it’s the easiest—and least expensive—way to whiten
your teeth at home. In fact, you’ve told all your friends and family that
they too should be using baking soda toothpaste if they want superwhite choppers. “Baking soda, baking soda, baking soda.” You won’t
shut the heck up about the damned baking soda. You’ve been using the
toothpaste for more than a decade. And you’ve recommended it so much
that your friends and family are afraid to smile in front of you for fear of
being chastised should their teeth not meet your annoying new dentalwhiteness standards.
One day, however, you see a disturbing article in the newspaper. Oh
no! A quote about baking soda by Ken Burrell, D.D.S., senior director of
the American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs, sends
you reeling: “We think the public believes there is some benefit, but in
fact, there is no evidence to show any therapeutic value.”
Horrors! “How can this possibly be?!” you shout. Mental storm clouds
roll in, lightning strikes, and the first chink in your enamel-white armor
appears.
But it doesn’t stop there. Shortly thereafter you read this quote from
another respected dentist, “Baking soda has a taste sensation that makes
teeth feel good, but there is no proven therapeutic value.”
Gulp. Before you know it, you’re standing in front of the mirror
examining the whiteness of your teeth, wondering if all that white sparkle
was simply a pigment of your imagination. Your own dentist confirms
the horrible truth, and your baking soda sandcastle comes crumbling
down. Your feelings were attacked by reason, and eventually, critical
thinking—via central route processing—emerged the victor.

51

CA$HVERTISING

The Kung Fu Concession
Let’s say you really dislike any form of violence, but you’re not comfortable walking the streets anymore because of the recent surge in violent crimes in your area. Your friends are taking Wing Chun Kung Fu—a
lightning-fast and practical style for self defense—but you’re not interested. “And that’s that!” you say. Well, one day a friend hands you a
brochure from her Wing Chun school. It’s filled with gruesome stats
about local-area crime rates. And it contains testimonials from current
students who describe how they successfully defended themselves
against attackers. They talk about how safe the training is, how easy it
was to learn, how patient and caring the instructors are. The next day,
another friend whose child takes lessons tells you how her child defended herself against the schoolyard bully. Like sprinkling radish seeds
on fertile soil, new thoughts start to grow.
Fast forward to one week later. Walking in a dark parking lot back to
your car you think you’re being followed! Luckily it’s a false alarm. But
it happens again another night. And then every 10th person looks suspicious. And suddenly all you’re doing is thinking about those crime
stats, that Kung Fu brochure with the success stories you keep reading,
and how your friends and their children successfully used what they’ve
learned. And before you know it, you’re watching your friend in class,
and you’re now one step closer to becoming the school’s newest member.
Of course, your prospects may remain suspicious of the ideas you
present, and many will reject the ad—just as they can with any other ad.
(A 100-percent response rate is still the stuff of advertisers’ dreams.)
But many others will amend their beliefs in order to harmoniously exist
with their new perceptions. Not to do so causes cognitive dissonance, an
uncomfortable feeling that happens when you simultaneously hold conflicting thoughts or beliefs—something the human mind dislikes intensely.

Change the Importance of the Beliefs
Another approach is to change the importance of beliefs, rather than
the beliefs themselves. That’s because it’s easier to strengthen or weaken
an existing belief than it is to change it.
The most successful method is to strengthen your prospects’ current beliefs either by supporting them with factual evidence (pouring
on the stats, reports, studies, testimonials), or by using everyday examples (success stories from other users, for example) with which your
prospects can identify. Many advertisers take this technique one step

52

How to Get Inside Their Heads
further and reinforce additional beliefs, which are unlikely to meet with
resistance because they don’t conflict with existing beliefs.
The strategy of manipulating current beliefs, either through reinforcement or undermining, is far easier and more likely to succeed than
attempting a wholesale change of basic beliefs. That’s why it’s the more
popular persuasion strategy.
For example, nowadays everyone knows that smoking and excessive
drinking are not good for your health. But no matter how often or how
forcefully you stress these points, consumers’ defensive tachometers
redline instantly if they sense that they’re being criticized or attacked.
“You talkin’ to me? You talkin’ to me?”
How do you avoid this? By either (1) reinforcing the beliefs of those
prospects who already hold a positive view about your product, or (2) by
subtly offering an alternative set of beliefs to those you wish to convert.
For example, advertisers of food and drink know that most consumers today believe in the importance of a healthy, balanced diet. They
can reinforce this belief—and gain an advantage over their rivals—by
emphasizing that their brand contains vitamin x, y, or z, or is sugar free,
or any other health-related benefit that will build upon the audience’s
currently held beliefs. (Simply put, we’re adding on to what we know
they already believe. We’re giving them more of what we know they want
to hear: how healthy our product is for them.)
Remember: we don’t want to cause any negative reactions. Our goal
is not to fight with our prospects. We don’t want to tell them they’re
wrong. We want to change their beliefs without causing a negative, defensive reaction.
For instance, rather than blatantly stating “Milk is healthier than
soda,” you should present images and factual examples of the potential
health risks posed by soda, and compare that with equally graphic and
persuasive evidence for the health benefits of milk. See the difference?
This way, you avoid a head-on collision with your prospects’ existing
beliefs. You weasel your way in, so to speak.
Now listen carefully. Regardless of what technique you use, your
prospects must remain unaware that you’re attempting to influence
them. You want them to think they’ve made their own decision. This
way there are no bruised egos; they claim the decision as their own, and
it’s far more likely to become cemented in future new behavior.
“Gotcha, Drew...but how do I do this?”

53

CA$HVERTISING
You do it by removing your prospects’ need for cognitive (critical)
thinking. The following technique makes it easier for you by dividing
products into those that require a lot of cognitive thought, and those
that require little.

Principle #9: The Elaboration Likelihood
Model—Adjust Their Attitude
It’s quite a mouthful, isn’t it? Don’t fret. We touched on this earlier,
so now let’s dig in! The Elaboration Likelihood Model, or ELM, suggests there are two routes to attitude change: the central route and the
peripheral route. Here’s the difference:
✸ The central route: Persuading using logic, reasoning, and
deep thinking.
✸ The peripheral route: Persuading using the association of
pleasant thoughts and positive images, or “cues.”
Which method should you use? That depends on your product.
The peripheral route encourages consumers to consciously—or often
unconsciously—focus on superficial images and “cues” in order to influence attitudes and decisions, without any serious consideration of
the ad’s content.
By contrast, the central route encourages your audience to really think
about it...to consider the ad’s issues and arguments before reaching any
decision, especially making a purchase.

The ELM Rule of Thumb
You think harder, longer, and deeper about important purchases
than you do for unimportant ones, right? Of course. Psychologists say
that consumers’ motivation tends to be higher when they’re considering products with “high personal relevance.” That’s fancy talk for something that either costs big bucks, or is important (to the buyer) in some
way—such as earthquake insurance for someone whose house teeters
precipitously on the San Andreas fault (for example, uh, like mine).
You’re not going to purchase a $928,000 house using the same
thought process that you’d use to buy a can of pork and beans, right?
Of course not. The two buying decisions require different levels, qualities, and depths of thought. When thinking about buying the house,
your brain switches to central route processing. Meaning that you’ll
carefully consider all the arguments and analyze all available facts. “Let’s

54

How to Get Inside Their Heads
see...interest rates on the 5-year adjustable rate mortgage compare favorably to 30-year fixed...our current debt-to-income ratio is 18 percent...and
if we put down at least 20 percent we won’t need to pay for private mortgage insurance, thereby lowering our monthly payments.”
That’s an example of left-brain thinking, referring to the side of
your brain that controls logical thought and reasoning; crunching numbers and weighing options. And it’s the kind of thinking you ought to
do before making such a purchase. Buy the wrong house and—after
uprooting your family, moving across the country away from family and
friends, and starting a new job—you could easily wind up shackled in a
self-created financial and emotional torture chamber.
By contrast, when you’re holding two cans of baked beans, your
brain presses the big peripheral route button, and the result is simply,
“Yum. Beans!” No big decision here. And not much brain power is
needed. After all, if you buy the wrong beans, you simply say,
“Blorf...lousy beans!” and dump them down the drain.
So what kind of thought process does purchasing your product
require?
If Your Product Requires:

Then Do This:

Central Route
Processing

Pour on the facts, stats, evidence,
testimonials, studies, reports, and case
histories. Weave them into your most
persuasive sales argument.

Peripheral Route
Processing

Load your ads full of colorful, pleasant images, humorous or popular
subject matter, or the sponsorship of
celebrities.

When advertising your peripheral route product, don’t neglect including the features and benefits, of course. Just realize that most consumers won’t rack their brains over which brand of sugar, paperclips, or
thimbles to buy. These things—and many others—are simply not “deep
thought” purchases and therefore don’t require deep-thought ad content.
Don’t get me wrong. I didn’t say you don’t need to do anything but
show some smiling faces and a photo of my cute flat-coated retriever
Joey to rake in sales. You should still give basic data to satisfy their

55

CA$HVERTISING
fundamental data needs. If you sell ink-jet paper, for example, you still
want to state its size, color, weight, sheet quantity, and even the TAPPI
Brightness Standard rating. If you have competitors—and most of us
do—and your product is better than theirs in some way, for heaven’s
sake, say it!

Cues Feel Good, But Central Route
Processing Makes Them Prefer You
Yesterday they couldn’t get enough of your product. Today they
can’t even remember its name. Why? The Elaboration Likelihood Model
provides an explanation for why some attitudes persist throughout a
consumer’s lifetime, whereas others are less stable and more prone to
change. Research has found that attitudes based on central route
processing are more resistant to counter-persuasion, and show greater
attitude-behavior consistency than attitudes formed by peripheral route
thinking.
It makes perfect sense. Because when you use central route processing, you support your decisions with well-considered mental arguments
that you’re constantly seeking to reinforce and strengthen. “After all,”
you say, “I gave it a lot of thought...I know it was the right decision.”
(Notice how attitudes formed by central route processing become so
closely aligned with the ego that they become inseparable. Anyone who
challenges something you carefully thought about—put a lot of “think
time” into—seems to be challenging your very intelligence!)
Want examples? Look around you! Talk to people about any topic in
which they spent a ridiculous amount of time in mental exploration,
reinforcement, and justification: religion, politics, abortion, child-rearing,
and education, for examples. Their positions on topics such as these
are stubbornly persistent and tenaciously resistant to change.
Now ask these same people, “What kind of soap do you use? What
brands of cereal do you eat?” For products such as these, and others,
they may have preferences, but their attitudes about them can typically
be easily changed.
One last thing you should know about the ELM. Attitudes developed using central route processing will last longer than those formed
by the peripheral route. Simply put, logic and reason burn themselves
into the brain far more deeply than good feelings created by visual cues
or other emotion-stimulating catalysts.

56

How to Get Inside Their Heads
Remember: When you get someone to think deeply about something, and you persuade them to arrive at a conclusion, they will adopt
their decision as a result of their own thinking, protect it, and defend it
against (competitors’) attacks as if it were their “baby”—their “brainchild.”
By using the peripheral route to persuasion, advertisers are relying
on the effectiveness of what social psychologists call cues, as we discussed earlier. These cues are mental shortcuts that, if utilized correctly,
can convey an ad’s message without the need to engage the consumer
in any form of deep thought. The following technique is based upon
the influence that can be exerted by using the right cue for the right
occasion.

Principle #10: The 6 Weapons of
Influence—Shortcuts to Persuasion
Social psychologist Robert Cialdini is a clever guy. In preparing his
book Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion (1998), he took three years
and went undercover performing a variety of jobs to watch influence in
action. Posing as everything from a used car salesman to a telemarketer,
he studied the words and behaviors that move people to comply...and
buy. From this, he developed his Cues of Life model that describes how
people are persuaded using six general “Cues of Influence.”
These cues are mental shortcuts, and are effective in many different
situations—especially when your prospect isn’t using careful, “considered” thought. Use these cues when you’re writing an ad using the
peripheral route to persuasion, but fuhgeddaboutit if buying your product requires lots of thought, reasoning, and maybe even a little justification, such as a luxury item or a high-cost anything at all.
Known by the mnemonic CLARCCS, Cialdini’s six cues are:
1. Comparison: The power of your peers.
2. Liking: The Balance Theory. “I like you...take my money!”
3. Authority: Cracking the code of credibility.
4. Reciprocation: What goes around comes
around...profitably!
5. Commitment/consistency: The “Four Walls” technique.
6. Scarcity: Get ’em while they last!

57

CA$HVERTISING

Cue #1: Comparison
Let’s first look at comparison, which is similar to group persuasion—
or the bandwagon effect—and is an extremely potent weapon in your
advertising armory. The question, “Everybody else is doing it, why aren’t
you?” exerts a powerful effect on consumers. Human psychology teaches
us that no one likes to be left out, and that we’re all driven by a need to
belong (See Principle #4: The Bandwagon Effect). Therefore, if someone sees his or her friends, family, or peers wearing a certain fashion
(low-cut sneaker socks, for example, putting a certain bumper sticker
on their car (“Support Our Troops!”), or drinking a specific brand of
beer (Corona with a juicy lime wedge), there’s enormous pressure to
conform, both internal (“Gee...everyone’s wearing really short sneaker
socks...mine are really high; I wonder if I look like a dork.”) and external (“Hey Drew, what’s with the dorky high white socks? You look like
that geek from our 1977 gym class!”).
As an advertiser, this is a godsend. Because if I can successfully
convey the message that my product is the one that a certain group
should choose, then my sales could snowball simply from creating this
mindset.

Cue #2: Liking
Liking says, in effect, “Because you like me, you should do as I say: BUY!”
This potent cue applies whenever a consumer feels a connection with a
representative of a company, the characters or personalities in an ad, or
another user of the product.
For example, I used to work with a woman named Dianne. She used
to sell everything from candles to baskets. And she’d always pass around
her catalogs to other employees and ask for orders. I watched many
succumb to the pressure of the liking cue. She had the kind of personality that made you instantly like her. But what about the quality of the
candles and baskets she sold? Oh, that didn’t matter one bit. Because it
was the internal pressure to accommodate or please Dianne—driven by
the liking cue—that caused so many people to buy from her.
Similarly, when a coworker you like storms into your office and says,
“Hey...my daughter Ariel is doing a fund raiser for cancer research...would
you please sponsor her in his race?” Wow...talk about a triple whammy!
(1) Daughter, (2) cancer, and (3) the person asking. You’re screwed. Just
sign the form and fork over the cash.

58

How to Get Inside Their Heads
Remember: The lynchpin of the sale is liking—you must like the
person for it to work. And this liking could be focused on anyone involved in the transaction, whether it’s the person handing out flyers on
the street corner, the celebrity whose face adorns an ad, or the friend
who purchased the same brand last week and is now urging you to do
likewise.

The Better They Look, the More Others Like
“Don’t judge a book by its cover” is a great expression, but that’s
exactly what people do when they look into the eyes of a person they
consider attractive. Many psychological and sociological experiments
have concluded that attractive people exert a greater influence on others, and are considered to be more trustworthy and likable (Down &
Lyons, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1991). No wonder most
ads feature happy, attractive faces smiling out at the consumer from the
pages of magazines, newspapers, and direct mail catalogs.
And here’s another interesting fact: Contrary to popular belief, men
are most attracted to pictures of other men, and women to pictures of
other women. Why? Psychologists say: Identification. All of us are interested primarily in ourselves; no one is more important to you than
you. When an ad shows a picture of a handsome, important-looking
man, for example, other men will identify with that person, step into
his shoes, and briefly become handsome and important-looking
themselves. This same principle applies to women.

Cue #3: Authority
The third cue is authority, and it’s a mental shortcut used since the
beginning of time. Many healthcare products have long relied on the
endorsement of the “man in the white coat” for authority. Just as people
trust the word of their doctor, dentist, or optician, they’ll generally accept the authority of any official-looking person who endorses an advertised product.
This is a prime example of the peripheral route to persuasion in
action. Using an official, intelligent, or authoritative figure to promote
a product saves consumers the trouble of researching or examining the
issues, and they simply accept the facts and claims as being true. In
fact, before the FCC cracked down on it, many advertisers hired actors
who played doctors in popular TV shows to endorse their aspirin, cold
remedies and other medical-related products, fully outfitted in the doctor

59

CA$HVERTISING
costumes they wore in the shows. Funny, isn’t it? The viewers knew these
people were just actors, yet they were still persuaded by the powerful
authority cue built by their characters. The cue is so powerful that it
didn’t even matter when the FCC forced these actors to say “I’m not
really a doctor, but I play one on TV....” They still bought!
Think! What authority in your industry does your target market respect? Do whatever you can to get a testimonial or full-blown endorsement. Then get permission to use this person’s image in your marketing.
Pay the authority to do a short video you can use on your Website or on
a DVD. Then add a list of persuasive facts, figures, and scientific-looking
graphs, and the authority cue can help you make a lot of money.

Cue #4: Reciprocation
During a CA$HVERTISING workshop, I asked someone in my
audience, “Eileen, are you well-mannered?” She quickly shot back, “Of
course I am!” I continued, “Okay, then what do you do when someone
gives you something?” She says, “I say ‘thank you.’” I continue,
“Yes...and then what do you feel compelled to do?” She thinks a moment and blurts out, “Uh...give them something in return?” Exactly!
This is the basis of the mental cue known as reciprocation, and it’s a
favorite of catalog companies, subscription magazines, and any business engaged in sampling. Did you ever wonder how these companies
could afford to give away freebies with every first order? The reason is
reciprocation. They give you something, and you’re compelled to purchase something from them in return. The influence is so strong, in
fact, that the free gift may be nothing more than a scratchy 2-cent pen
filled with only a week’s worth of ink.
Why does it work? Because the company has given you something,
and you accepted it! Social convention now decrees that you’re obligated to give something back. It’s why survey companies often send
you a one-dollar bill to thank you for completing the survey. The fourpage survey may contain 100 tedious questions, but the dollar makes
you feel that you should do it. It’s fascinating.
Here’s another familiar example. Walk through many major U.S.
airports and you might be handed a rose by a member of the Hare
Krishna religious group. Upon accepting this free gift, you’re then asked
to make a donation. Because you already accepted the gift, you’re
compelled to comply. You’d feel badly if you didn’t. Ahhh...there’s

60

How to Get Inside Their Heads
that childhood training again, and it’s now a programmed response. At
least now you’re aware of it, and now you can use it to your advantage.
Jay Siff, a wonderful client of many years, uses the reciprocation
principle to the hilt. His company, Moving Targets of Perkasie, Pennsylvania (MovingTargets.com), sends gift certificates to people who just
moved into the neighborhood on behalf of his primarily restaurant and
auto-shop clients. Free pizza, free entrée, free oil change. Not only does
the service introduce new movers to the retailers’ businesses, but it also
sets the reciprocation ball in motion. When they’re done chomping on
that pizza, or driving away with a fresh oil fill—assuming they were both
treated right and satisfied—not only do they have good feelings about
the business, but they’re also far more likely to return and spend money,
often becoming loyal long-term customers. Moving Target’s use of the
reciprocation principle is so refined and effective—and has been for
more than 16 years—that many companies use it as their primary marketing strategy.
What can you give away to start the reciprocation ball rolling? I’m
not talking about some junky little trinket, like a cheap key ring featuring your logo and phone number. You want to give something of value.
Something that makes your recipient think, “Hey, wow, wasn’t that
thoughtful?” Can you give a free sample? A gift certificate? If you’re a
consultant, how about giving 30 minutes of your time with no obligation? Many attorneys offer free first consultations, but that’s not what
I’m talking about here. The reciprocation mindset is initiated when you
give something to someone as a gift. It’s not something they should
have to request from you. (If I have to request it, it’s a favor.) And it’s not
something you give me in return for something I’ve done. (That’s a
thank you.)
Here are some examples of what I’m talking about.
✸ Are you a dog groomer? Give a free flea and tick collar.
✸ Are you a bakery? Give a free rye bread or a box of
chocolate chip cookies.
✸ Are you a bike shop? Give a free water bottle.
✸ Are you an old-fashioned shoe repair shop? Give a free
shine.
✸ Are you a karate school? Give a month of free lessons.
✸ Are you a printer? Give 50 free photocopies.
✸ Are you a florist? Give a free bunch of flowers.

61

CA$HVERTISING
✸ Are you a cigar shop? Give a free lighter.
✸ Are you a pizzeria? Give a free slice.
Whoever you are, give away something...and let the magic of reciprocation turn mere prospects into profitable, perhaps long-term customers.

Cue #5: Commitment/Consistency
In Disney’s popular Haunted Mansion, an eerie voice threatens, “Look
around you. Your logic cannot deny that this chamber has no windows
and no doors. Which offers a rather logical challenge...to find...a
way...out.” (Cue demonic laughter.)
That’s the object of the commitment/consistency cue, also known
as the “Four Walls” technique—not to scare buyers away, but to box
them in, cause them to take a stand, and make a request that would
demonstrate their commitment to their stand. You create an ad that
poses four questions to your prospect, with each answer leading logically to the next, until, at the end of your ad, your prospect is all but
committed to making the purchase (Cialdini, 1980).
The commitment/consistency cue says that if you take a stand on
an issue, you must remain consistent with your beliefs. This is a powerful
psychological tactic, and one that’s more effective when used in person, because the cue relies on social pressure as its engine. For example,
someone knocks on your door and says, “Hi! Would you please sign my
petition to help reduce neighborhood crime and make our streets safer?”
No-brainer, right? So you sign away. Now that you’ve committed to that
very reasonable stance, society expects you to remain consistent with it.
And so you will. That’s why when the petitioner next says, “Great! Thank
you. And now would you please make a small tax-deductible $3 donation because we need to buy two-way radios for the neighborhood
watch?” Yikes. You’ve been boxed in, my friend. And now you can do
little else but gulp, reach into your pocket, and hand over the cash. You
were a lab rat in an experiment, and you behaved exactly as anticipated.
To not donate the $3 is infinitely more difficult than if (1) you didn’t
support the cause (you’d have no reason to donate), or (2) you weren’t
first asked to sign the petition. Because you did, however, the petitioner
had already pre-closed you, and the natural next step was to simply
extract your moolah. The closing question—whatever it is—says, in effect, “Okay, you’ve declared your stance. Let’s see if you’re now going
to support your own declared position.” To not do so is the ultimate in
hypocrisy.

62

How to Get Inside Their Heads
Although not as effective in print as in person, here’s how the principle looks on paper. You’d start by ask questions that stimulate the
response you’re seeking:
Are you afraid to walk the streets alone? Don’t you wish
there was an easy way to protect yourself against muggers and other low-life scum who prey on innocent
people? You know the ones I mean: The dirt bags who
step right into your face and ask—threateningly—“you
got some spare change?” Wouldn’t it be great if there
was a safe, effective, and easy way to stop thugs cold at
the push of a button? A way that gives you instant and
total control over even the most savage 350-pound, drugblitzed maniac who has the gall to try to intimidate—and
possibly terribly injure—you and your family? Introducing The Tesla Sizzler...the world’s first personal anti-mugging
microwave force field....
The idea is to elicit a string of “yes” responses from your prospect,
each successive answer adding momentum, creating a snowball of interest and desire, and presenting your product as the path to fulfillment. Because there’s no human interaction, there’s also no social
pressure for you to be consistent with your answers, meaning to buy.
Just because you’re interested in preventing getting mugged and you
find the whole idea of cooking local muggers with personal microwave
guns fascinating, there’s no one interacting with you to escort you to
the next step in the sales process. Without this social pressure, the ad
relies on a multitude of copy and design techniques to encourage you
to read the whole sales pitch and then pick up the phone and place
your order. Effectively written long-copy direct-response ads do exactly
this.

Cue #6: Scarcity
The last of Cialdini’s cues is scarcity. If, in addition to telling you all
the benefits of attending, I say, “My CA$HVERTISING workshop has
very limited seating and is very difficult to buy tickets for,” then it becomes more desirable. Why? Simply, we want what we cannot have.
Take the Cabbage Patch Kids craze of 1983. People went bonkers
trying to buy these ugly vinyl-faced dolls. They knocked over display
tables, screamed, cursed, and fought like rabid cats in department
stores. One particularly unruly crowd of 1,000 would-be Cabbage Patch

63

CA$HVERTISING
“parents” turned violent after waiting eight hours and stormed a Zayre
store in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. Wielding a baseball bat, the manager kept the frenzied buyers at bay. The fact is, the success of these
dolls caught the Coleco company off guard: they couldn’t produce
enough to satisfy demand. In fact, the consumer affairs department of
New York’s Nassau County filed a lawsuit accusing Coleco of “harassing” children by advertising dolls that weren’t available, forcing the company to suspend advertising. Too funny. And too late. The scarcity effect
had already thrust its hooks into the American doll-buying consciousness, and that, in turn, fueled even greater demand.
If you can’t have it, you suddenly want it. It’s like the armrest you
weren’t using in the movie theater or airplane. As soon as someone sits
beside you and starts using it, you suddenly have a strong desire to
somehow “get it back.” You feel as if they took “your” armrest. And it
might continue to annoy you the entire length of the movie or until
your flight lands. Hmmm...when you had it, you didn’t want it. When
someone took it from you, there was nothing you wanted more. Interesting how we humans are wired.
The most common manifestation of the scarcity principle is the use
of lines such as one-day sale, limited offer, only while supplies last, or first
come, first served, all which make the product appear in short supply,
and therefore increases consumer interest. The success of this technique is apparent—every business uses it! Using the scarcity cue is like
using a deadline, except scarcity also suggests exclusivity, not simply
limited supply. Ahhh...now that’s a powerful one-two punch if I ever
saw one.
In a twist of the scarcity cue, I’ve seen several business consultants
announce, “Steve is finally available to accept three more clients. But
hurry! Because once his roster is full, his services won’t be available for
another two years.” In this example, consultant Steve is emphasizing
scarcity by telling you he’s now available...with an added zinger that
warns you that you better act fast.

Principle #11: Message Organization—
Attaining Critical Clarity
Understand if you saying don’t what I’m, persuade I can’t you. Huh?
The point is clear. “If you don’t understand what I’m saying, I can’t
persuade you.” Even if you have the greatest product in the world, the
slickest-looking sales materials, and scores of hot testimonials from

64

How to Get Inside Their Heads
customers who light candles for you every night, if your ads are disorganized or poorly structured, your cash register ain’t gonna ring! Even
worse, you could actually harm your business with ads that leave your
prospects with an inaccurate or totally incorrect interpretation of your
intended message—something that could negatively affect you for a
long time.
That’s why ad agencies and the psychologists they employ are careful to ensure that, whatever the strength of the message, it must always
be well organized and easily and accurately understood. Simple is better, but simple isn’t necessarily easy. Communicating clearly and plainly
takes practice. But fret not. I devote an entire technique to this topic in
the next chapter, in “Ad Agency Secret #1: The Psychology of Simplicity.”
After reading it, you’ll know exactly what to do and how to do it.

Principle #12: Examples vs. Statistics—
And the Winner Is...
Which is more persuasive: examples or statistics? Read the following two paragraphs and decide.
EXAMPLE
It’s a motor car like none other, with a gracious, parlorlike cabin that beckons your entrance. Accept its
invitation...swing closed its vault-like door...and prepare
yourself for a driving experience reserved only for a privileged few. Surrounded by rich, fragrant leathers, exotic
hardwoods, and costly Wilton wool carpeting, this vehicle spotlights your discriminating lifestyle...your insistence on the finest. Now turn the key and the world’s most
refined automotive power plant instantly awakens. Shift
into drive...accelerate...and thrill to a rush surpassing the
descriptive capacity of words alone. Feel it? That’s
adrenaline coursing through your veins, as 453 muscular
horses beckon you to set them free....
STATISTICS
✸ 6,749 cc 6.7 liters V 12 front engine with 92.0 mm
bore, 84.6 mm stroke, 11.0 compression ratio,
variable valve timing/camshaft and four valves per
cylinder.

65

CA$HVERTISING
✸ Power: 338 kW, 453 HP SAE @ 5,350 rpm; 531 ft
lb, 720 Nm @ 3,500 rpm.
✸ External dimensions: overall length (inches): 202.8,
overall width (inches): 78.2, overall height (inches):
62.2, wheelbase (inches): 130.7, front track
(inches): 66.4, rear track (inches): 65.8 and curb to
curb turning circle (feet): 43.0.
✸ Luxury trim wood and leather on doors, and wood
and leather on dashboard.
Which of these—example or statistics—is more appealing to you?
Which whets your appetite for more? Most importantly, which really sells
you? If you’re like most people, the example did the trick. Sure, the
stats are nice to know, but when it comes to making the cash register
go ka-ching, you should always place your money on the example. Why?
In a word: emotion, the key to sales.
The example you just read—and the emotion it elicits—puts you
smack behind the wheel of a brand new, $403,000 Rolls Royce Phantom
ultra-luxury “saloon” automobile. And did you notice what happened
when you read it? I caused you to test drive—to demonstrate—the product inside your head! In fact, no matter what you sell—even a $10 mouse
trap—until you can get your prospects to imagine themselves using your
product or service, they’re not going to take the next step and buy it.
Featuring colorful examples causes what I call “self-demonstration,” and
boosts your prospects’ desire to own and motivation to buy.
In addition, research has shown that well-written examples, (1) relate more closely consumer’s personal experiences, and (2) are easier to
comprehend because they require less mental effort to process (Petty &
Cacioppo, 1986). No wonder most ads and TV commercials use testimonials and endorsements rather than long lists of facts and figures.
They’re simply more dramatic and engaging.
“But Drew! Some people do want to know facts and figures!” Of
course they do. And depending upon what kind of product you’re selling, you should include them. But not to the exclusion of strong, emotionally provoking examples. And a good case can be made for including
both examples and statistics in your ads. The proportion of each should
be carefully considered so you don’t alienate either group. “But how do
I know that?” Simple: Your product will tell you.

66

How to Get Inside Their Heads
✸ Do you sell beer? Forget the stats. Show attractive
people, barely dressed hardbodies, and good times.
✸ Cars? Play up the examples and include some stats for
the performance, safety, or efficiency enthusiasts,
whichever category of buyer to whom your particular
model appeals.
✸ Laser printers? This is primarily a utilitarian product,
isn’t it? So tell how much paper it holds, how fine its
resolution, how long the ink lasts, its maximum monthly
duty cycle, and other relevant stats. No one gets turned
on thinking about ink jets. (At least none that I know,
and many of my friends are professional writers!)
✸ Landscape services? Your product is all about beauty,
self-image (how your property looks to the neighbors),
and convenience (never having to mow your lawn on
those hot, sweaty summer days). Plenty of opportunity
for examples here!
✸ Gym memberships? Pure emotion here. Show photos of
lean and attractive men and women, before and after
shots, and testimonials from happy members. Sure, you
can say how many exercise machines you have and the
square footage of your facility, but it’s those photos that’ll
hook ’em.

Principle #13: Message Sideness—
Dual-Role Persuasion
There are two sides to every story, right? Well, the same is true in
advertising. You can present just your side of the story...or you can
present your side and your competitor’s side in a head-to-head product comparison.
Although one-sided messages are simpler (because you’re discussing only your product), studies show that two-sided messages are more
persuasive, but only if they stick to the format of defending their own
position while also attacking the competition (Allen, 1991).
The key is to present both sides and still advocate only one—your
own. How? By making your two-sided message appear to the reader as
fair-minded and balanced. For example:

67

CA$HVERTISING
Acme makes an excellent fly swatter, and they’ve been
doing so for years. Heck, in the 1940s and ’50s they were
the most popular way to kill the pesky critters. And they
did a darn good job back then. However, now it’s the 21st
century. And it’s time to step up to full-scale fly-swatting
automation, with our new RoboSwat Laser-Powered AntiFly Gun Turret. So easy and effective, it makes old-fashioned
(and messy) swatters obsolete!
Using the peripheral route to persuasion (superficial thinking, remember?), your audience is likely to think that your two-sided message
is more thoughtful and credible than your competition’s one-sided ads
that talk only about themselves. Complimenting the other company on
its fine products instantly makes your prospect think, “Hmmm...they’re
being fair to the other firm, not bashing them, actually saying nice things,
but simply pointing out that theirs is better.” If your prospect decides
to use central processing (deep thinking and reasoning) and considers
the message carefully, the combination of defense and attack makes
them think even more systematically about the issue, and start questioning the validity of the other side. So not only does it help persuade
prospects to favor your product, but it also helps turn them against
those of your rivals.
Comparison ads don’t have to be about bashing the other guy into
submission. You can calmly point out the advantages your product provides. What benefits do you offer that they don’t? Is yours faster? Easier?
Cleaner? Healthier? More fun? Less expensive? More effective? Comparison charts that point out your product’s advantages at a glance are
extremely effective. Consumers interpret such charts as, “Ahhh...all the
research has been done for me. All I need to do now is buy.” This is
peripheral processing at its best. That’s because a central-route thinker
would say, “Hmm...sounds good, but how do I know these facts are
right? I’m going to check what the other company is saying. After all,
these people are trying to persuade me to buy!” The fact is, however,
most people are lazy peripheral-route thinkers, and the comparison chart
is all they need to make their buying decision. So be a good sport. Tell
both sides. Compliment what’s good about your competition. It might
even make you feel good. Then say why you’re even better. The persuasive
impact resulting in additional sales will definitely make you feel great!
You can even play both sides yourself. You’ll recall back in the Preface
I said if you’re afraid of the words persuasion and influence you should

68

How to Get Inside Their Heads
“stop reading” because “this book is not for you.” I was playing takeaway, telling you that you couldn’t have something in an effort to make
you want it even more. Don’t ever be afraid to tell people why they
shouldn’t buy what you’re selling. Not only does it boost your credibility,
but if they’re true prospects, it’ll also add fire to their desire.

Principle #14: Repetition and
Redundancy—The Familiarity Factor
“People don’t start seeing your ad until you run it seven times.”
Did you ever hear that one? It’s likely based on a similar expression
used in personal selling: “It takes an average of seven sales calls to close
a deal.” Whatever the actual number is, repetition is an important factor in getting your point across in advertising. Repeating your message
not only helps break down walls of disinterest, but with each repetition
your ad also gets exposed to those who may not have noticed it the last
time.
What’s more, with each repetition of your message, your audience
naturally grows more familiar with your product and company. And
unless they have some reason to think otherwise, a feeling of acceptance begins to grow. As this acceptance strengthens, an affinity begins
to develop. They, in essence, begin to feel comfortable with you. This
comfort leads to greater trust, which opens the door to the sale.
Remember: The aim of all advertising is to create marginal differences
in consumer attitudes and perceptions. Through repetition, these small differences can build into larger differences, and can often tip the balance
in favor of the advertised brand.
Can repetition be bad? Possibly. Research suggests that there’s an
optimum level at which repetition is effective, but that beyond this level
it can lead to frustration and consumer “turn-off ” (Petty and Cacioppo,
1979). In short, the study involved presenting arguments to college
students about increasing university spending. Some students heard
the argument once, others three times, the rest five times. Student who
were exposed to three repetitions backed the spending proposition. In
the students who heard it five times, agreement dropped off considerably. Researchers Petty and Cacioppo suggested that at this high level
of frequency, tedium may have set in, which caused the student to
attack what they then considered to be an offensive communication.

69

CA$HVERTISING
Please don’t construe this to mean that you shouldn’t run your ads
more frequently than three times! Asking college kids about university
spending isn’t the same as advertising your products and services in
your local newspaper. I shared this example simply to make you aware
that endless repetition isn’t necessary a good thing, and to caution you
to be sensitive to its use. Hey, just because you love your ad doesn’t
mean your audience will. But if it’s making you money, by all means,
keep it humming. Use repetition wisely and you’ll build brand familiarity. Overuse it, and you could be growing a bumper crop of consumer
contempt.
Run the same ad over and over, and you’re being repetitious. Run
different variations of the same ad, and you’re taking advantage of the
power of redundancy. This is a simple way to extend the life span of an
effective message or slogan. By presenting the same message in a different format and slightly different copy, you trick the reader into believing he’s seeing a new ad rather than a recycled version of the one he saw
last week. It touches on what’s called multiple sources and multiple arguments. Simply put, the more different sources that expose a subject to
the same message, the more convinced the subject will become.
If, for example, you hear one women tell you how healthy it is to eat
chocolate every day, you’ll either believe or not, depending how the
idea strikes you at the time. (And how long it’s been since your last bar
of—yum—Perugina!) However, if five different people approach you
throughout the day and tell you a similar, but slightly different version
of this argument, chances are it’ll have serious impact on your belief
system, and you are much more likely to adopt this delicious idea as
your own.

Principle #15: Rhetorical Questions—
Interesting, Aren’t They?
The rhetorical question is really a statement disguised as a question.
Pretty sneaky, isn’t it? (Another example.) Not a new technique by any
means, it was even mentioned in Aristotle’s classic guide to oratorical
skills, The Art of Rhetoric (circa 330 BC, first published in 1926). Television attorneys are known for using rhetorical questions during cross
examination to pressure their opponents, throw them off balance, and
add an air of veracity to their arguments. For example, “And isn’t it true
you stuck the dinner fork in his eye just minutes after you threw the
cheese wheel at his head?” Other examples of this principle:

70

How to Get Inside Their Heads
✸ Dial soap commercials asked, “Aren’t you glad you use
Dial? Don’t you wish everyone did?”
✸ In 1926, newspaper ads for the laundry detergent Rinso
asked, “Who else wants a whiter wash—with no hard
work?”
✸ Rolaids posed the question, “How do you spell relief?”
✸ And W.B. Doner—the largest independently owned
advertising agency in North America—is apparently a fan
of the rhetorical, in its catchy, “What would you do for a
Klondike Bar?” campaign. (Personally, I’d do plenty for
anything covered in chocolate, but let’s stay on topic
here.)
This simple technique allows advertisers to make factual-sounding,
possibly persuasive claims without having to support them with factual
evidence or logical argument. Some research suggests that using rhetorical questions can sometimes change how people think, and modify
their buying behavior. The idea is, if consumers aren’t thinking carefully about an advertiser’s message, slipping in a rhetorical question
grabs their attention and encourages them to fire up some brain cells
and think about the message.
According to McCroskey (1986), “The reason for this is due to our
social training. When somebody asks us a question, it is required that
we respond to it. To respond correctly requires that we understand the
question.”
Bottom line: The listener or reader makes a conscious attempt to
consider the advertiser’s message, which increases the likelihood of successful persuasion.
Respected communication researcher Dolf Zillmann conducted the
first of only a few published studies on the topic in 1972. Several other
researchers followed. And although the whole idea sounds great, there
is, unfortunately, not much agreement as to the effectiveness of the
technique.
Some say, “Yes! It works!” (Burkrant and Howard, 1984; Enzle and
Harvey, 1982; Howard, 1990; Howard and Kerin, 1994; Petty, Cacioppo,
and Heesaker, 1981; Swasy and Munch, 1985; Zillmann, 1972; Zillmann
and Cantor, 1974). Results from other studies say, “Nope, it’s not particularly effective in all situations.” (Cantor, 1979; Munch, Boller, and Swasy,
1993; Munch and Swasy, 1988; Pentony, 1990.) In 1998, researchers Gayle,

71

CA$HVERTISING
Preiss, and Allen analyzed the currently available research on the topic
and concluded that rhetorical questions have “no appreciable influence on persuasion.” Other research suggests that the technique could
make your audience feel pressured and persuaded, and therefore cause
them to look more critically at your message and regard you as less of an
authority on the topic (Swasy and Munch, 1985).
Sigh. With all this research, isn’t there anything on which we can all
agree regarding rhetorical questions? Perhaps just this: the use of rhetorical questions may be beneficial for increasing message retention. Questions designed to emphasize a point, rather than to persuade, are likely
to cause your audience to remember your message. Makes sense, right?
The more you think about something, the more brain cells you devote
to it, and the more likely you are to remember it.

Principle #16: Evidence—
Quick! Sell Me the Facts!
Whenever I sit down to write an ad, I know that, unless I can convince you to believe me, you’re not going to log into PayPal and make
my bank account grow fatter. That means that my words are responsible
for taking you from your present state of belief, disbelief, or ignorance,
and convincing you that what I’m selling is worth more than the money
in your pocket.
Did you ever think of it that way? It’s a good context in which to
hold your products and services. People buy from you when they believe
what you are selling is of greater value than the dollars they need to
exchange for it. For example, in my advertising workshop, I say, “Let’s
do a little experiment in consumer psychology.” I hold up a #10 envelope with a big question mark printed on it, and ask, “Does anyone
have a $20 bill?” Several people raise their hands. I choose one person,
walk over to her, and ask the following question: “If I asked you to trade
me your $20 for what’s inside this envelope, what is the one question
you might want to ask me before making the trade, knowing that once
we make the deal, you can’t get your money back?”
Invariably, the participant responds, “What’s in the envelope?” No
matter where in the country I deliver the workshop, when I make that
offer, participants will always ask that same logical question: “What’s in
the envelope?”

72

How to Get Inside Their Heads
What does this tell us? It tells us that consumers all think the same
thing before making any purchase decision. They all want to know one
thing before they exchange anything of value, whether it’s time, materials, or money. They all want to know what they’re going to get out of the
deal. They all want to know the answer to the big question, “What’s in it
for me?” or the acronym, “WIIFM.” Until they know the WIIFM, they’re
not only hesitant to make the deal, but they’re also reluctant to even
raise their hands in response to my question asking if they have a $20
bill! This hints at the fear that accompanies many buying decisions: the
fear of loss. (Re-read that last sentence.)
Next—and notice the contrast with this experiment—I hold up a
plastic bag with a $20 bill clearly visible. I asked the audience, “Who
would like to trade their $1 bill for this bag containing a $20 bill?” Not
surprisingly, dozens of hands spring up, as if I just offered to toss gold
Krugerrands to the first person who can catch them. In this example,
the audience—these consumers—demonstrated that once they knew the
WIIFM, the benefit to them, they were much more likely to exchange
their money for what was in the bag. This is the best way I know to
demonstrate the foundational principle of advertising: telling your prospects the benefits of what you’re selling. They must, must, must be
convinced that what’s in “your bag” is worth more than the money you
ask for it, or the deal won’t happen.
All right, so we know we have to convince our prospects of the value
of what we’re selling. To convince means to cause belief. So how do we
get them to believe? One great, proven way is by offering persuasive
evidence. Here’s the definition of evidence in 19 words: “Any factual
statement, object, or opinion not created by a source that is used by that
source as support” (Reinhard, 1988). More simply, evidence can be facts,
figures, testimonials, endorsements, research, charts, videos—you name
it—as long as you, the advertiser, didn’t create it yourself.
There’s no doubt about it: Research concludes that evidence works,
and works well. Advertisers who use solid evidence persuade more effectively than those who use poor evidence or none at all. Let’s face it:
You can’t create an ad loaded with a slew of benefits and simply expect
people to believe what you write. When they first see your ad, they know
full well that you’re trying to sell them. If what you’re offering is something in which they’re interested, they want to believe your claims. That’s
because believing your claims and purchasing your product may lead
them to enjoy the benefits you’re promising. It’s like going to a personal

73

CA$HVERTISING
development seminar and watching a professional speaker. You’re not
sitting there hoping the speaker screws up. You want him or her to perform well. You want him or her to speak powerfully, to move you, and
perhaps even change your life for the better.
Likewise, if what you’re selling promises to either to resolve a problem I’m experiencing or in some way better my life, I want to be convinced that it will work as you say it will. But at the same time—and this
is why the cash register doesn’t ring every time—I don’t want to be ripped
off. It’s up to you to appeal effectively to my emotions to get me excited
enough to spend the money. It’s also up to you, especially for a costlier
product, to supply enough reasoning so I can justify the expenditure of
my money, thereby satisfying my adult sense of responsibility. Strong
evidence can do this. In addition to its persuasive effects, evidence also
creates a positive impression of your company as one that offers “legitimate” goods and services. (After all, they were backed by evidence!)
Evidence is most effective when we’re faced with buying important
or expensive goods or services. In these situations, we’re primed to think
carefully about our purchases and consider the arguments and issues
involved. As a nice added benefit, deep, reasoned (central route) thinking can produce a long-term change in your prospect’s attitude that’s
resistant to the sales messages of your competitors. Isn’t that a nice
benefit?
Interestingly enough, even peripheral (superficial) thinkers are influenced by strong evidence. When faced with facts and figures, testimonials and charts, these thinkers say, “Wow...look at all these facts and
figures. It’s got to be true!”
CA$HVERTISING Tip: In order to influence our peripheral-thinking
friends, make sure you present your evidence in a clear and easy-tograsp manner. Peripheral thinkers will not take the time to figure out
what you’re trying to say. They’ll look at your data, and—boom!—make
a decision as to what it means. Therefore, you should feature colorful
charts and graphs, and facts, figures, and quotes from respected intellectuals and professionals.
Once a salesperson has you “cornered,” he can unleash his full arsenal of sales techniques on you. In print ads, you have a limited amount
of space to make your point, and a limited amount of time to grab your
readers’ attention and hold it throughout your sales pitch. The final
principle exploits these time limitations by encouraging the reader to
use psychologically powerful mental shortcuts called heuristics.

74

How to Get Inside Their Heads

Principle #17: Heuristics—
Serving Billions of Lazy Brains Daily
First, let’s overcome our fear of the strange word heuristics. Pronounced “hyu-RIS-tiks,” it’s a derivative of the Greek word heuriskein
meaning “to discover.” Heuristics pertain to the process of gaining (or
discovering) knowledge, not by critical thinking and reasoning, but by
intelligent guesswork. We referred to this process earlier by the less
tongue-twisting term, cues, when we specifically discussed the six-cue
CLARCCS model popularized by social psychologist Robert Cialdini.
Well, not to be outdone, researchers Stec and Bernstein (1999) put
forth their own brand of persuasion heuristics, three of them to be exact: the Length-Implies-Strength Heuristic, the Liking-Agreement Heuristic—
affectionately known as Balance Theory—and the Consensus-Implies-Correctness
Heuristic. We’ll explore only the first principle—Length-Implies-Strength—
because we already covered the other two in our discussion of Cialdini’s
six weapons of influence: liking and comparison, respectively.
Let’s face it: We humans are lazy creatures. Most of us prefer to take
the quickest route to arriving at decisions, because doing so eliminates
the hard work—the “pain” of thinking, and the need to consider all the
complex or overwhelming details. If we can make a decision quickly,
then we can get back to doing more fun stuff, such as watching ridiculous videos on YouTube. And when it comes to using our brains, for
many of us, most anything is more pleasurable than engaging in deep
thought. Inventor-genius Thomas Edison said it best: “There is no expedient to which a man will not go to avoid the labor of thinking.”
Heuristic decision-making to the rescue! You see, if we’re exposed
to the right type of information, our “mental trains” will stay on their
peripheral processing tracks and pull into the station fully prepared to
make a decision in seconds or minutes instead of hours, days, or longer.
In addition to Cialdini’s six cues, there are a number of heuristics that
psychologists and researchers have identified, but not all are as readily
applicable in advertising. The following heuristic, however, is one of the
most popular—and effective—and you can start using it immediately.
The Length-Implies-Strength Heuristic is a principle that exerts an
influence similar to evidence. It’s based on the assumption that a product or service is more likely to be viewed favorably if the ad is long and
contains numerous, credible facts and figures. It causes your prospect
to say, in effect, “Wow...look how much is here. It must be true.” It’s

75

CA$HVERTISING
similar to listening to someone speak at length about a particular topic.
Eventually, when you’ve heard enough—as long as the presentation was
reasonably polished—you’d probably feel that the speaker knew what
he was talking about. After all, “He went on for so long!” Of course
length itself doesn’t mean something is truthful, but that is exactly how
this principle works.
Loading your ads with testimonials is one way to tune your prospects’ brains to “Heuristic Channel #1.” Another way is to write long,
engaging copy. Not only does long copy give you more opportunities to
persuade, but it also has the effect of causing prospects to believe that
because there’s so much copy, there must be something to it! This is the
very essence of the Length-Implies-Strength heuristic.
How many photos of satisfied customers do you have? Put them in
your ads, brochures, and sales letters, and on your Website. Show just
one photo, and it communicates little more than you have one satisfied
customer. Show dozens of them, and it produces a powerfully positive
perception of credibility and certainty about your claims by quantity
alone.
Remember my client Jay Siff of Moving Targets? He sends his prospects a four-page full-color brochure called “101 Success Stories.” It
contains—you guessed it—101 testimonials and photographs from clients who rave about his service. It impossible to not be impressed by
this brochure. Even if you didn’t read the rest of the information that
accompanies this sales piece, you’d be instantly inclined to believe that
the service he promotes actually works. Not only does it work like
gangbusters—and yes, it really does—but even 101 people said so!
To promote my advertising workshop, I created a one-page, 8 1/2 ×
14-inch flyer that I call my “Speak Out!” sheet. The page is divided
into three narrow columns and is jam-packed with quotes from participants, including their names, business names, cities, and states. At the
top of the page, in the upper left-hand corner, is my photograph. The
big and bold headline, to its right, says:

Participants Speak Out!
Here’s What they’re Saying About
Drew Eric Whitman’s CA$HVERTISING Workshop:

76

How to Get Inside Their Heads
It’s packed with so many glowing testimonials that by the time you’re
finished reading, or merely scanning this flyer, your head is spinning!
You “know”—heuristically, at least—that there must be something to it.
How many good reasons can you give prospects to buy your product or service? Simple lists are powerful. In my work for Day-Timers, I
gave prospects 22 good reasons why they should buy the great DayTimer organizer. It hit them from most every angle. If you had even the
slightest penchant for organizing your life, this list would (1) get you
excited about the many benefits you’d enjoy, and (2) help convince you
that the product has real merit because of the 22 reasons I listed to buy it.
Your prospect might be able to discount a few of the things you
throw at them. But if you provide enough information, the LengthImplies-Strength heuristic will kick in and save the day. “Look how long
this list is! Maybe a couple of these things aren’t completely factual, but
this one looks right...and this one is cool...and hey, this benefit would
be helpful.”
A politician stands in front of a crowd and pulls out a 50-page document that he proclaims contains more than 200 examples of how his
opponent, Ted Torpy, flip-flopped on critical issues facing the nation.
He cracks open the document and starts reading off one damning flipflopped quote after another, vocally numbering each one in an effort to
impress upon his audience the scope and problematic quantity of his
opponent’s worrisome trait. Not only will what he reads trouble his audience, but so will the sheer number of things read. (Never mind that 95
percent of the quotes were taken out of context, and some others factually fractured.)
But Mr. Politico doesn’t stop there. No way. He next labels his
opponent’s collection of slippery statements, “Torpy’s Tricky 200,” and
starts mentioning it in his print ads and TV commercials. He prints
and binds the document and passes it out at rallies. He converts it to a
PDF and offers it for instant download on his Website. People read the
first few pages, quickly thumb through the rest, and clearly see that
each “flip-flop” quote is boldly numbered. Not 1 in 1,000 readers do
any fact checking. Who has time for that? So “Torpy’s Tricky 200” starts
to get the play this politician knew it would, and it eventually takes on a
life of its own. T-shirts. YouTube videos. Bumper stickers. Blogs. Few
people read the entire document, but who needs to? You can see there
are 200 quotes in it! It must be saying something!

77

CA$HVERTISING
Poor Ted Torpy. The latest victim of heuristic homicide. He was
“cued” to death. In retrospect, he never really understood exactly how
the strategy worked against him. And speaking of the word heuristics,
interestingly enough, not 1 in 100 of those who voted against him had
ever even heard the word before.

78

CHAPTER 3

Ad-Agency Secrets:
41 Proven Techniques for
Selling Anything to Anyone
Don’t reinvent the light bulb...just switch it on!
Thomas Edison held an unbelievable 1,093 patents. Not for ridiculous, useless trinkets similar to 99 percent of the contestants on ABC’s
reality show American Inventor, but for revolutionary, life-changing discoveries that influence the lives of billions of people worldwide: the
phonograph, incandescent light, motion picture camera, automatic telegraph system, universal stock ticker, electric vote recorder, mimeograph,
telephone receiver, and so many others.
And talk about persistence! While working to improve the incandescent electrical lamp (existing ones didn’t burn long enough or were
too bright for small spaces), Edison and his associates tested more than
3,000 different theories and thousands of plant materials.
“Before I got through,” Edison said, “I tested no fewer than 6,000
vegetable growths, and ransacked the world for the most suitable filament material.” Whew! At what point would you have given up?
“Fascinating, Drew, but why the history lesson?” To make a point. If
for some wacky reason you wanted to build your own light bulb, instead
of spending years duplicating Edison’s thousands of failed experiments,
wouldn’t it be wiser to read his lab notes and see how he did it? How he
discovered that a carbonized bamboo filament burns slowly enough in
a vacuum to produce more than 1,200 hours of reliable light?

79

CA$HVERTISING
Of course! You’d simply duplicate what he did, rapidly produce a
long-lasting light bulb, and get on with your life. Whenever you study
someone who was successful at a task you’re preparing to attempt, you
pave yourself an incredible shortcut to success.
The same applies to your advertising. There’s no need for you to
spend years and thousands of your own dollars experimenting, when
thousands of Edisons have already done it for you. If you like experimenting, knock yourself out. On the other hand, if you want results
now, why not save yourself the trouble and simply do what works? Life’s
too short.
The following 41 techniques are backed by decades of real-world
testing by ad-agency professionals, marketing experts, and scores of
dedicated consumer and social psychologists. And most importantly to
you and me, each technique has been proven effective in the only place
it really matters: the real world.
Fact: By the time you’ve finished reading CA$HVERTISING, you’ll
know more about how to create powerfully effective, money-making advertising than 99 percent of your competitors will know in their entire
careers—guaranteed. Now let’s get started.

Ad-Agency Secret #1:
The Psychology of Simplicity
Stop reading this book. Because if you don’t follow the advice of
this first lesson, no matter how wonderful your product, your advertising will likely fail. Miserably. It’s the foundation for everything else I’m
going to teach you. It’s like telling a first-time boxing student that lesson #1 is “How to stand.” Boring? Maybe, but if he skips this lesson
because “It’s boring!” he’ll probably get his head blasted off his shoulders the first time he steps into the ring. And although the lesson might
be obvious, it’s still vitally important. If you treat this first topic lightly,
your ads (and your business)—just like that newbie boxer—will likely
suffer one painful knock-out after another. It’s as simple as that.
Fact: The goal of advertising is to get people to act. And the tools
we use to create printed advertising (as opposed to TV and radio) are
words (as opposed to sound and moving images). So, doesn’t it logically
follow that, in order for our ads to be effective, we need to use our words
effectively? Of course. And using words effectively means we must write
so our audience understands what we’re saying. As simple as it is, my

80

Ad-Agency Secrets
friend, you’ve just learned the #1 key to all effective written communication: Write so people can understand. This idea is based on Consumer
Psychology Principle #11, “Message Organization.”
Write to the chimpanzee brain. Simply. Directly.
—Eugene Schwartz
Let’s face it: You could have the greatest invention since indoor
plumbing, but if no one understands what the heck you’re trying to say
about it, you may as well have the crappiest one. What’s the difference?
In either case, they’re not buying. Effective communication doesn’t happen until the people to whom you’re trying to communicate understand
your message. Just because you’re running an ad in a newspaper or
magazine, or your Website is online, doesn’t mean you’re communicating effectively. You are advertising, I’ll give you that. But until someone
reads and understands it, you’re just talking to yourself. And you don’t
need to spend a penny to do that. (I talk to myself quite often, so I
know.)
It’s one thing to try to write simply; quite another to actually do it.
And short of doing your own testing—asking friends, neighbors, and
family members to read your sales copy—it’s tough to get a real sense of
just how readable your copy really is. Dr. Rudolf Flesch to the rescue!

The Flesch Reading Ease Formula
In his book, The Art of Plain Talk, Dr. Rudolph Flesch analyzes what
makes writing easy or difficult to read. In the early 1940s he developed
a formula to determine readability that we still use today, nearly 70 years
later. If you use Microsoft Word, accessing your Flesch Reading Ease
Score (FRES) is just a button-click away. Based on a scale of 1 to 100,
the higher your score, the easier the reading. If you’re a math lover, or
you just want to understand how the formula works, here are the five
steps. (If you’re a masochist, you can calculate the formula manually.)
Step #1—Count the words: Count as single words contractions,
hyphenated words, abbreviations, figures, symbols and their combinations.
For example, shouldn’t, extra-rich, TV, 12, &, $17, 5%.

81

CA$HVERTISING
Step #2—Count the syllables: Count the syllables in words as you’d
pronounce them. Count abbreviations, figures, symbols, and their combinations as one-syllable words. If a word has two accepted pronunciations, use the one with fewer syllables. Unsure? Grab a dictionary.
Step #3—Count the sentences: Count as a sentence each full unit
of speech that’s separated by a period, colon, semicolon, question mark,
exclamation point, or dash. Ignore paragraph breaks, colons, semicolons, initial capitals, or dashes occurring within a sentence.
Step #4—Determine the average number of syllables per word:
Divide the total syllables by the number of words.
Step #5—Figure the average number of words per sentence:
Divide the number of words by the number of sentences.
The result—whew!—is your readability score.
Your ad gets only a fraction of their
intelligence...people won’t study your ad carefully.
They can’t be bothered. And so you have to make
your ads simple.
—John Caples
Flesch gives an excellent example of how complexity affects score.
The sentence, “John loves Mary” scores 92—very easy. Now let’s crank
up the difficulty. “John has a profound affection for Mary.” Not quite as
simply said or as specific, is it? Score: 67. Not too bad, but definitely
headed in the wrong direction. Now the worst: “Even though John is
not normally given to a display of his deeper emotions, he allegedly has
developed a profound affection for Mary, as compared to the more equable feelings he seems to have for Lucy, Fran, and, to a lesser extent,
Sue.” Ugh...what a wordy mess! Score: 32—difficult. See what happened?
It degraded into vagary, complexity, and added a whopping 36 hard-toread words. It’s now comparable in reading difficulty to the Harvard
Law Review. You can be sure that Romeo never expressed his affection
for Juliet this way!
How do the scores translate into school grades? According to Flesch,
here are the rankings:

82

Ad-Agency Secrets
If Your Score Is:

Then Your Grade Is:

0–30

College grad

30–50

College

50–60

10th to 12th

60–70

8th and 9th

70–80

7th grade

80–90

6th grade

90–100

5th grade

If your score’s too low, Flesch suggests to “shorten the words and
sentences until you get the score you want.” In fact, for best readability,
he recommends sentence length of approximately 11 words. You should
also refer to people (Bob, Eileen, he, him, she, her, and so on) at least 14
times in every 100 words.
Not to be outdone by Dr. Flesch, other researchers started popping
up like springtime crocuses with their own readability indices. There’s
the Fog Index, which tells you the number of years of education your
readers need in order to understand you; the Flesch-Kincaid Index,
used by the U.S. Department of Defense to check readability of its
mind-numbingly dry forms and publications; the McLaughlin
“SMOG” Formula, developed in 1969 by Harry McLaughlin, former
editor of the London newspaper the Mirror; the Forcast formula, developed for assessing U.S. Army technical manuals and forms; and others.
Phooey! There’s no need for you to calculate all this yourself. I let
my computer do the work—the very same computer I’m using right
now to type the words you’re reading.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Did you notice what just happened? By
commenting on the context of what’s going on, specifically, you reading
this book, teamed with the implication that I’m “on the other side of
the writing” using my computer, I’ve shaken you out of your reading
routine a bit, haven’t I? Chances are you felt somewhat more “present”
to what’s going on because I called your attention to it. I’ve shifted the
focus from the topic being discussed to commenting on present events

83

CA$HVERTISING
outside of the topic. Now, stop reading this side note (I just did it again!)
and jump back to the topic.
Here are two test paragraphs that talk about the same offer. Read both
and see which you enjoy reading most. Which is easiest? Which is most
clear? After you read both, I’ll tell you what the computer analysis said.
Test Paragraph #1
“Would you like to make $10,000 a month making your
own ice cream? (My wife Lindsay and I do. In fact, sometimes we make thousands more. We showed our friend
Steve, and now he makes an additional $4,300 every
month with ease.) Then keep reading. Because by the time
you’re finished this letter, you’ll know how. In fact, I’m
going to spill the beans and tell you over 48 insider secrets that not one person in 1,000 knows. Any one of these
secrets is worth the cost of this entire package.”
Test Paragraph #2
“If you wish to acquire vast financial resources, please
pay close attention to the following information. Numerous individuals in the frozen confectionary industry have,
for years, kept closely guarded secrets that reveal the fast
route to establishing yourself as a much-in-demand artisan ice cream producer in a ridiculously short period of
time. While they shudder to think about passing on such
data to the general public, I am more than willing to proffer said privileged information to you.”
Okay, now let’s take a quick look at the stats.

Sentences
Paragraph
Per
#
Paragraph

Flesch
Reading
Words Characters Ease Score
Per
Per
(1-100:
Word
Sentence
Higher =
Better)

FleschKincaid
Grade
Level

1

7.0

13.1

4.1

72.1

6.4

2

3.0

25.3

5.3

34.1

14.7

84

Ad-Agency Secrets
Wow, what a difference! Although Test Paragraph #1 contains more
sentences, Test Paragraph #2 features much longer sentences...over 12
words longer each. Longer sentences mean longer thoughts, which requires more mental effort to follow them. The more you ask people to
think, the more likely you’ll lose them.
What’s more, Test Paragraph #1 uses shorter words. But where’s
the biggest difference? In the Flesch Reading Ease Score and FleschKincaid Grade Level. With its score of 72.1 (remember, 100 is best), Test
Paragraph #1 ranks with the easy-to-understand speaking you’d hear
watching your favorite movie. A 6th grader should be able to read and
understand this passage. By contrast, Test Paragraph #2 scores similarly to the New York Review of Books, and is far more difficult for the
average person to read and comprehend. With its low score of 34.1, it’s
considered “college” reading level. And according to the U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics: (1) In
2007 only about 30 percent of 25- to 29-year-olds had completed a
bachelor’s degree or higher, and (2) Approximately 3.4 million 16- to
24-year-olds were high school dropouts.
Regardless of your prospects’ educational background, short words
and short sentences make reading easier for everybody. (Of course, don’t
use all three-letter words and super-short sentences and paragraphs.
Vary them so your copy sounds natural, not robotic. A good rule of
thumb is that about 70 to 80 percent of your copy should consist of
one-syllable words.)
The software also checks for what Flesch calls definite words. These
are nouns, proper names, pronouns, verbs, and specifics. The more
specific you are, the less figuring your reader has to do in order to understand your message. “Joey ate chocolate” is more definite than saying, “Someone did something.”
DON’T SAY:
“Become financially successful.”
DO SAY:
“You’ll make up to $2,495 every week.”
DON’T SAY:
“Want your entire body to look more appealing?”

85

CA$HVERTISING
DO SAY:
“MEN! Do you want a rippling, rock-hard stomach?
WOMEN! Do you want lean, luscious thighs?”
Whoopee! Those headlines would knock ’em dead! So follow these
four simple prescriptions for highly readable writing.

Prescription #1: Use Short, Simple Words
“As I proceed to issue the following informational text, I hope that
you understand that the vast majority of individuals will, without question, proceed to issue forth a counter-opinion predicated upon the fact
that their life experiences dictate just the opposite guidelines as those
issued to them in good gesture. Unfortunately, in an atmosphere in
which educational disciplines are of utmost importance, I hasten to
dictate the potential loss of data acquisition; however this is indeed the
perceived and forecasted outcome of this quite burdensome situation.”
Did you enjoy reading that last paragraph? Probably not. Why? Because it sounds as if it were written by a constipated Harvard Law professor. And, according to the McLaughlin “SMOG” Formula, it’s written
on a post-graduate degree reading level, which is comparable to IRS
code. Yawn. Unfortunately, more people write this way than you’d believe. This is especially unfortunate when the person writes advertising!
But there’s a good reason why people write that way: that’s how many
people were taught to write!
In school, we were taught to write as adults. To talk with “big” words.
So the word tired became enervated. Hungry became famished. Big became
elephantine. Stubborn became recalcitrant. Evil became nefarious. Sigh...you
get the idea.
But do you see what has happened to you and me? Because we were
trained to write this way, we tend to write this way whenever we write
anything. This means that every time we write an ad, brochure, sales
letter, e-mail, or Web page, we are, in effect, flushing our money down
the toilet. Why? Because nobody understands what the $@#!* we’re talking
about!
Forget those annoying $10 words and phrases you were taught in
school and business. You know the ones I mean: and you’ll enjoy same,
the aforementioned benefits, you can liken this to, herein are 10 reasons, and
any other of those tired, stodgy expressions. Just be clear, natural, and
simple.

86

Ad-Agency Secrets

Prescription #2:
The Shorter Your Sentences, the Better
It’s easier to read short sentences, isn’t it? Sure is! It’s quick! Lively!
Exciting, too, wouldn’t you say? Chop your sentences down with a big
ol’ ax. You’ll rivet people’s eyes to your sales copy, encouraging them to
read more.
Rule of thumb: Express only one thought in a sentence, no more.
Use your next sentence to say the next thing. Why? Because it’s much
easier for your readers to process and understand just one thought at a
time. And because everything you say is important, you want them to
understand each of your sales points, don’t you? Of course.
So do as the good Dr. Flesch suggests: (1) Use shorter words—70 to
80 percent of them should consist of just one syllable, and (2) write
shorter sentences—aim for about 11 words each. People will read more.
The more they read, the greater your chance of persuading them to
buy. The more they buy, the more money you make. Any questions?

Prescription #3: The Short, Short Paragraph Trick
Here’s a great trick used by today’s top copywriters to keep people
reading and moving ahead at a quick pace. You simply ask a question or
make a quick statement, and then answer the question or continue the
thought in the next paragraph in just a few words. Here’s an example.
Dear Bob,
Would you like to know a secret way of making money
by simply watching TV?
I thought so.
Now let me explain...
Not only does this short-paragraph trick move your readers’ eyes
down the page, but it also quickens their pace and makes your ad or
letter look much more inviting. (As opposed to a big, solid page full of
text.) Don’t overdo this technique, or your writing will look too mechanical. Limit your regular paragraphs to about four or five short
sentences.
Drew Alan Kaplan knows this trick well. In his wildly popular directmail catalog of high-tech electronic gadgets, Kaplan writes extremely
engaging copy that sells products like hotcakes. He took a tiny business

87

CA$HVERTISING
run from his cramped dorm room at UCLA, and grew it into a slamming 400-person sales machine that moved, for example, 450,000 radar detectors, 250,000 stereo equalizers, 100,000 subwoofers, and
900,000 bread makers. (Yours truly bought a radar detector, and I’m
still baking fresh bread today. Yep, I’m a sucker for great copy.) In virtually every one of his full-page catalog ads, he starts the first paragraph
with sentences consisting of only two to four words. Of the eight products I just now reviewed on his Website, six of them use this technique:
✸ “I confess.”
✸ “We’re free.”
✸ “It’s tough.”
✸ “This is important.”
✸ “S.W.A.T. teams use them.”
✸ “It’s a problem.”
It’s a fast and easy way to lure people into your copy, and it’s supported by some of the biggest names in advertising.
Limit your opening paragraph to a maximum
of eleven words.
—David Ogilvy

Prescription #4:
Pile on the Personal Pronoun Personality
Finally, I want you to load your copy with pronouns, such as you,
me, I, he, she, him, they, and them. Be especially generous with the words
you and I. Pronouns give your copy a warm, human flavor that people
notice instantly. It helps turn your mass communication into personal
communication, the most effective kind. In fact, It’s nearly impossible
to overuse the word you in well-written copy. Generously sprinkle it
throughout like shaking parmesan cheese on a pizza. Start sentences
with it! End sentences with it! Blow it up in big type! Put it in your
headline! Ask questions and make statements using pronouns:
“Do you...Can you...Would you...Should you...May I ask you a question? May I ask your advice? Can I get your opinion? Did you know...Let
me tell you...I think you’ll like this idea...”

88

Ad-Agency Secrets
Okay, let’s review what you learned so far.
YOU LEARNED that in order for your advertising to be successful,
you must first be aware of what blocks your readers from understanding your message.
YOU LEARNED that your readers don’t care about your big vocabulary, only what you can do for them. That means you use shorter
words, sentences, and paragraphs.
YOU LEARNED that advertising copy doesn’t have to follow all
the rules of a college composition. Your copy has one job: to sell, Sell,
SELL!
YOU LEARNED how to use questions to draw people into your
copy and keep them reading. Right?
YOU LEARNED how to use pronouns, such as the words you and I
to make your copy sound personal. And you now know an easy way to
determine the readability of your copy by using the Flesch formula.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Do you see how I kept repeating the words
you learned in the five preceding paragraphs? Paragraph leaders are a
powerful way to increase reading speed and establish an upbeat tempo
in your ads. The repetition increases the reader’s perception of volume,
and, according the Length-Implies-Strength heuristic discussed in
Chapter 2—can help boost credibility. Other effective paragraph leaders are, “We Guarantee...,” “We Promise...,” “You’ll Receive...,” and similar. And even if you really didn’t learn all those things (despite my parroting
“you learned”), the mere repetition of the word can cause you to doubt
your own feelings because “it’s so confident...it’s so specific...and there
are so many of them.”

Ad-Agency Secret #2:
Bombard Your Readers With Benefits
Let’s now talk about the million-dollar secret for getting inside your
readers’ heads: benefits. Play close attention. If you don’t incorporate
this idea in all of your advertising, you may as well pack up now and try
a different business that sells to beings other than humans.
Remember our discussion about the Life-Force 8 from Chapter 1?
As you may recall, the LF8 are the primary human desires that are hardwired into our brains. These are powerful wants we’re biologically driven
to fulfill, no matter who we are, where we live, or what we do. If your
product or service can satisfy one of these desires—or any of the nine

89

CA$HVERTISING
secondary wants—you have the making of killer benefit claims that can
start the sales ball rolling. The fact is, if you don’t put benefits in your
advertising, whether it’s an ad, brochure, sales letter, Website, or whatever, then kiss your money goodbye!
Now, before you start puckering up, let’s examine what a benefit is,
in advertising terms. Benefits are those things that offer your prospects
value. And as the word implies, they’re things that directly benefit not
you, but your prospect. Is a benefit the same as a feature? No! You must
learn the distinction. A feature is simply a component of a product or
service. For example:
PRODUCT: Rolls-Royce Phantom Coupé
FEATURE: Top-grade, hand-selected seat leathers.
BENEFIT: Luxurious comfort in all climates.
FEATURE: Deep-pile Wilton lamb’s wool carpeting.
BENEFIT: The rich softness underfoot and lush elegance.
FEATURE: 453 horsepower, 6.75-liter V-12 engine.
BENEFIT: Power, control, supreme reliability.
FEATURE: Bold, dignified styling with artist Charles
Sykes’s “Spirit of Ecstasy” flying proudly on the hood.
BENEFIT: The feeling of power, success, and that you’ve
“arrived.”
Get it? The features are the attributes. The benefits are what you get
from those attributes. The benefits are what entice people to buy. Remember, the entire time people are reading your ads, they’re consciously
thinking, “WIIFM?”: “What’s In It For Me?” In fact, they can’t turn it
off! Over and over and over and over. It’s like a corrupt MP3 file that
never stops repeating. By loading your ads with benefits, telling your
prospects how and what they gain, how their lives will improve, you’re
answering the “WIIFM” they’re continually trying to satisfy. And when
you do, their desire for your product increases, and you’re on your way
to making a sale.
Consumers buy based on what the product will do for
them, not on what ingredients it has.
—Newspaper Association of America

90

Ad-Agency Secrets
In my workshop, I drive the point home with a popular (and often
hilarious) two-person interaction called the “Feature-Benefit Exercise.”
I pair up participants and ask one to play the role of the seller, and the
other the prospect. The seller starts by telling the prospect one feature
of his product or service. Then I instruct the prospect to respond with
a loud and annoyed “BIG DEAL! What’s in it for me?” And to convey
just how worthless it is to state only the product’s features, I instruct the
prospect to simultaneously throw her hands in the air and give a look of
pure disgust while shouting this. The seller must begin his reply with
the words, “You benefit by....”
Here’s a typical interaction.
Business Owner: “My product is an ink-jet printer. One
feature is multiple ink tanks.”
Prospect: “BIG DEAL! What’s in it for me?!” (Arms flailing overhead.)
Business Owner: “You benefit by saving big money
because you don’t have to replace the entire cartridge
when only one ink color runs out.”
Prospect: “That’s nice...I spend a fortune for ink with my
current printer.
Business Owner: “Feature: 500-sheet tray.”
Prospect: “BIG DEAL! What’s in it for me?!” (Annoyed
look of disgust.)
Business Owner: “You benefit by not having to fill the
paper tray as often. Most other printers hold half as
much.”
Prospect: “Sounds like my printer; it’s a pain to keep
filling it.”
Business Owner: “Feature: Ultra-draft mode button”
Prospect: “BIG DEAL! What’s in it for me?!”
Business Owner: “You benefit by saving serious money
on ink because the Ultra-Draft mode uses 50 percent less
ink than other printers’ ordinary draft mode.”

91

CA$HVERTISING
The room usually erupts with laughter as dozens of prospects shout,
with annoyed faces and frantic gestures of impatience and dissatisfaction. By the end of the exercise, the sellers know exactly how to sell their
product. After all, they’ve been beaten down by prospects who’ve been
given the okay to express what prospects are always thinking anyway!
Sorry, but people are not interested in your new equipment (only if it
benefits them), or that you’re celebrating your 10th anniversary (unless
you’re slashing your prices). Likewise, the photos of your staff might be
all warm and fuzzy, but until you’ve poured on the benefits, they won’t
do a damned thing to make your cash register ring. Pictures of your
newborn baby Tabatha? Forget it! Snapshot of your new cat Lu Lu
Lemieux? Please! Benefits are what your prospects really care about.
Benefits tap into Consumer Psychology Principle #5: The Means-End
Chain we covered in Chapter 2, which suggests to always focus on the
core benefits and positive end results. Loading your advertising with benefits is the key to all successful advertising.
Tell me quick and tell me true,
or else, dear friend, the hell with you...
Not how this product came to be,
But what the damn thing does for me!
—Anonymous

Ad-Agency Secret #3: Put Your
Biggest Benefit in Your Headline
Talk about information overload! Estimates say we’re exposed to
anywhere from 247 ads per day (Consumer Reports) to more than 3,000
(Newspaper Association of America). If we’re to stand any chance of
convincing, persuading, motivating, selling, we must, must, MUST cut
through the clutter! The easiest way to do this is to always—without
exception—put your biggest benefit in your headline.
Unless your headline sells your product, you have
wasted 90 percent of your money.
—David Ogilvy

92

Ad-Agency Secrets
Did you know that 60 percent of all people who read ads typically
read headlines and no more? They skim until they “stub their eyeballs”
on something that interests them. That means that about 60 percent of
those that see your ad read only the first few words. Yikes!
Solution: Put the one thing that’s most important to them in the
place where they’re most likely to see it: your headline. For example,
let’s say you’re writing a headline for your restaurant workshop that
teaches waiters and waitresses how to boost their income.
DON’T SAY:
“Attention Food Servers: New Workshop Teaches You
the Tricks of the Trade!”
DO SAY:
“Attention Food Servers: New Workshop Teaches You
How to Boost Your Tips by 512%...or Your Money Back!”
If you’re an award-winning interior designer specializing in making
ordinary houses look like beautiful model homes:
DON’T SAY:
“Louise Taylor Designs Homes of Distinction”
Distinction? This claim is too amorphous; it creates no mental movies, and gives your prospects nothing to grasp. Instead:
DO SAY:
“Award-Winning Interior Designer Louise Taylor Turns
Your House Into a Gorgeous Model Home for Less than
You Ever Dreamed Possible!”
Ahhh...now we have a real idea of what Louise will do. She’s telling
us the #1 reason why someone would hire her: to make their house
look beautiful.
Is your camera shop drowning in rolls of film because everyone’s
going digital?
DON’T SAY:
“Capturing the Best Times of Your Life Is Now a Snap!”
DO SAY:
“GIANT FILM SALE!

93

CA$HVERTISING
All Rolls of 35mm Color Film are 25% Off—This Week
Only!”
Are you a bakery looking to hook customers with your heavenly new
“to-die-for” fudge-filled pastry?
DON’T SAY:
“Come In and Sample Our Latest Confectionary
Masterpiece!”
DO SAY:
“Attention Chocolate Lovers: Now Sink Your Teeth Into
the 8 1/2-Pound Fudge-Devil Volcano Pie—Absolutely
Free!”
See the simplicity? Your headline should immediately select the
audience you want to hook. By contrast, I saw an ad in a local shopper
paper for a lighting supply store that featured the headline, “We’ll Help
You Brighten Up Your Life and Save Big!” Ugh, what a waste. Why?
Because it does nothing to select its audience. The ad could be for
paint, window cleaning, or even antidepressants! Instead, how about
the ridiculously simple headline, “Need Lamps?” Think about it. Who
would be attracted to a headline that says “Need Lamps?” Someone
who needs lamps, of course! The audience, in this case, is perfectly
selected. There’s no guessing for whom it’s meant.
The headline is the “ticket on the meat.” Use it to flag
down readers who are prospects for the kind of product
you are advertising.
—David Ogilvy
Question: Is a longer or shorter headline more effective? Let’s again
turn to psychology. Researchers have conducted hundreds of tests to
see just how much the average person can effectively “take in,” or pay
attention to. The results from all studies are similar. The average Joe or
Jane can process a maximum of five to nine numbers (George A. Miller,
The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two, 1956) in a “single act of
attention.” Ever wonder why phone numbers are seven digits? Bell Telephone wanted to make them long enough to accommodate the most
variations, but short enough that people would remember them.

94

Ad-Agency Secrets
Word-wise, most people can grasp the meaning of five to six words in a
single glance.
So does this mean that short headlines get higher readership? Yes.
And studies confirm it. That’s because the number of words in a headline affects reading speed, and therefore affects how much of the headline is read.
Here’s an example to drive this point home. If you saw the newspaper headline “WAR!” it takes no effort whatsoever to read and process
it, does it? As long as you recognize the word, it communicates its meaning instantly. That’s why the readership is so high. Your eyeballs simply
have to hit the word, and it’s as good as read. As you add words, you’re
moving in the opposite direction of speed, work, ease, and understanding.
Take, for example, the headline, “War Was Declared Yesterday by
the Blordoni Tribe in the Nation of Kimbootu Against Its Historically
More Aggressive Southern Neighbors, the WoopWoops.” It simply takes
more time and effort to pore through a longer headline such as this,
despite the silly tribal names. It forces you to think more (and we know
most people would rather have cavities drilled than do that), and it
adds more opportunities to get lost in meaning and boredom. That’s
why short headlines get higher readership.
Short headlines enjoy higher readership than long
headlines. As headlines grow, readership shrinks.
—Starch Research
But before you grab an ax and start chopping down your headlines
like an oak tree, realize that well-written long headlines can be—and
often are—remarkably effective. In fact, some long-copy direct-response
ads use extremely long headlines that often flow into extremely long
subheads, creating a head/sub introduction dozens of words long!
A classic study of 2,500 ads appearing in the Saturday Evening Post
was conducted from 1939 to 1940 by researcher Harold J. Rudolph. The
results show that the shorter the headline, the greater the readership.

95

CA$HVERTISING
How Many Words
in the Headline?

How Many People Read
the Entire Headline?

Up to 3

87.3%

4–6

86.3%

7–9

84%

10–12

82.5%

13+

77.9%

In this study, the average readership of the shortest headline is about
1/7th better than the longest. We see the biggest drop in headlines with
more than 12 words. According to Rudolf, “These findings, obviously,
cannot be interpreted as an indication that a headline, to be consistently well read, need to only be short. Headline content is undoubtedly
the major element affecting readership.”
The flip side? A short headline isn’t necessarily an effective headline.
You can struggle just as much writing three words as you would 15, and
your ad could still flop. Oh, sure, you’d likely get higher readership with
the three-word headline because it takes no effort to read it, but that
doesn’t mean you chose the right words. According to David Ogilvy,
longer headlines sell more products.
“Okay, Drew. Now I’m even more confused!” Alright...let’s simplify:
1. Always put your biggest benefit in your headline.
2. If you can write two equally effective headlines, the
shorter one will likely be read by more people, all other
variables being the same.
For the purposes of practicality, never ignore rule #1, and keep rule
#2 in mind to maximize readership when creating your next ad. There,
don’t you feel better?

96

Ad-Agency Secrets

Ad-Agency Secret #4:
Crank up the Scarcity
Your ad is your salesperson. And in my seminar, I give an example
of a salesperson whom no business should ever tolerate. In a dry, boring, and monotone voice, I say, “Now you just take your time making
the purchase decision. No need to decide right away. Certainly this product will be available in the future whenever you’d like to buy it.”
Do you see a problem here? By suggesting there’s no need to act
now, that salesperson gives your prospects no incentive to buy now.
We’re talking about human inertia. Simply put, inertia is an object’s resistance to a change in its current state of motion. Like sitting on a couch
watching Seinfeld reruns—talk about inertia! It sometimes takes a miracle
to get up, change your clothes, and go run on the treadmill.
As advertisers, we need to motivate people to take action right now.
We don’t want them to wait, or think about it, or put off the decision
until the “later” that never comes.You want them to whip out their
credit cards and order now. And it’s not simply a matter of asking for the
order—any good salesperson knows to do that. It’s a matter of getting
your prospect to take action when the offer is presented to them. And you
do it by creating the perception of scarcity with powerful deadlines.
Tell people they can’t have something and they want it more than
ever. Remember our discussion of CLARCCS, the “Six Weapons of
Influence?” The final “S” in that acronym—as you may recall—stands
for scarcity, a powerful motivator. And it’s the fear of loss that gives deadlines their power.
Can you imagine creating a powerful ad, filled with excellent copy,
wonderful graphics, the perfect appeal; your pricing is dead-on, it’s
loaded with amazing testimonials, and it’s running in a publication that
you know will bring excellent response. The only thing you missed is
including a deadline. And it doesn’t matter whether you use a “hard”
deadline (featuring a specific cut-off date), such as “Sale Ends August
21st,” or a “soft” deadline, such as “Quantities are Strictly Limited”;
the absence of a deadline conveys that your offer is always available. And
this, more than anything else, connotes that there’s no need to buy
now; that there’s plenty to go around.
What do you think would happen if, starting tomorrow, all the world’s
salespeople began ending their presentations with the following phrase:

97

CA$HVERTISING
“You don’t need to buy this now. Take your time deciding. I’ll get back
to you in the future to see what you’ve decided.” It would spell economic collapse on a scale the world has never known.
Advertising is persuasion. And the most critical time to persuade is
when you’re asking for action. Always feature deadlines to discourage
response-killing human inertia. There’s no skill involved. It couldn’t be
easier. But boy, is it ever powerful. Simply include standard phrases
such as the following:
✸ Call Before April 5th
✸ Supplies Are Strictly Limited
✸ Offer Expires May 15
✸ Price Guaranteed Only Until August 3
✸ Offer Good Only Before 4 p.m.
✸ Seating Is Limited to 50 Participants
✸ NO Rain Checks Will Be Issued
✸ Good Only for the First 50 Callers
...and whatever other variations you can dream up. If you haven’t
been using deadlines, start tapping psychologist Robert Cialdini’s
Weapon of Influence #6, scarcity, and you’ll immediately see the difference it makes in your response.

Ad-Agency Secret #5: 22 Psychologically
Potent Headline Starters
Reading headlines is a lot like driving and reading signs. If you see
a sign pointing in the direction you’re interested in traveling, you’ll stay
on the road and keep motoring ahead. Otherwise, you’ll turn off and
look for a road that takes you where you want to go. Likewise, a headline
that interests you will keep you reading. If the copy’s strong enough,
perhaps you’ll also dig into your pocket and fork over some cash. Otherwise, you’ll quickly take another route: glance at the other ads, turn
the page, or click to another Website. In which case, to the advertiser,
you’re gone forever.
That’s why it’s critical that your headline do two things: (1) grab
their attention, and (2) motivate them to keep reading. If it doesn’t
do both, you could be giving away free gold bars, and most people
wouldn’t notice. That’s why word choice is so important. Fortunately,
with the advice in Ad Agency Secret #3 “Put Your Biggest Benefit in

98

Ad-Agency Secrets
Your Headline,” you know what to put in your headline. Now let’s talk
about how to say it.
There are four important qualities that a good
headline may possess. They are:1. Self-interest.
2. News. 3. Curiosity. 4. Quick, easy way.
—John Caples
Who isn’t interested in themselves? To appeal to a consumer’s selfinterest, simply write a headline that promises a personal benefit: whiter
teeth, higher income, healthier body, better relationships, and any others, especially those that tap into the Life-Force 8 desires discussed in
Chapter 1.
People read the newspaper for news and other information. We’re
naturally interested in what’s new, what’s going on around us. Any time
you can express your benefit with a news flavor, you add an extra zing
that’s very appealing. Your “news” can be as simple as announcing the
release or availability of your product, and the way it benefits your buyer.
Or, for an extra touch of timeliness, tie your ad into current events, weather,
sports, or anything topical. “ATTENTION LOS ANGELES: Present
This Coupon Below and Burgerilla Will Donate 10 Percent of Your Burger
Purchases to Help Earthquake Victims—Now Through Friday.”
Curious? Most people are. And a well-constructed headline can stir
up enough curiosity to motivate them to keep reading, as in most of the
following headlines. However, please don’t get cutesy or clever with
headlines that don’t target the right audience, simply to hook eyeballs.
The best example of this is the headline “SEX!” for ads that have as
much to do with sex as do ads for PVC patio furniture. You don’t simply want lots of eyeballs; you want the right eyeballs.
The following 22 tested headline starters can be used for most any
product or service. Simply replace the example wording with words relevant to your business.
1. FREE: “Free Book Shows You How to Write Sneaky
Advertising That Practically Forces People to Send You
Money!”
2. NEW: “Powerful New Seminar Teaches Flea Marketers
the Power of ‘Flea-Psych’ to Drive People Into a Buying
Frenzy”

99

CA$HVERTISING
3. AT LAST: “At Last...A Bakery That Uses Only Organic
Sugar, Flour, Milk, and Eggs!”
4. THIS: “This New Invention Stops Any Attacker in His
Tracks Without a Gun, Knife, or Black Belt in Karate.”
5. ANNOUNCING: “Announcing the Hottest New
Sandwich Craze From Southern California: The Malibu
Crust Pocket!”
6. WARNING! “WARNING! Some Dog Groomers Wrap a
Noose Around Your Dog’s Neck!”
7. JUST RELEASED: “Just Released: Psychologist’s Study
Reveals Little-Known Speaking Patterns That
Immediately Put Rude Salespeople in Their Place.”
8. NOW: “Now You Can Stop Any Attacker Without Guns,
Knives, or a Black Belt in Karate.”
9. HERE’S: “Here’s How a 95-Pound Granny Made a 275Pound Psychopathic Killer Cry Like a Baby for its
Rattle....”
10. THESE: “These Three Very Italian Men Make a Pizza to
Kill For.”
11. WHICH OF: “Which of These Hot Bodies Would YOU
Like to Show Off?”
12. FINALLY: “Finally...a Self-Improvement Seminar That
Moves, Empowers, and Transforms You for Life!”
13. LOOK: “LOOK! Now You Can Buy Cotton Candy
Machines at Wholesale Prices.”
14. PRESENTING: “Presenting the Easiest Way Ever
Developed to Learn the Piano.”
15. INTRODUCING: “Introducing the Only Water Ice
Stand in Philly that Uses Real Fresh Fruit.”
16. HOW: “How to Sing Like an American Idol in 90 Days or
Less—Guaranteed.”
17. AMAZING: “Amazing New DVD Lowers Your Blood
Pressure by Just Watching It!”
18. DO YOU: “Do You Know How to Stop Vicious Dog
Attacks with the Push of a Button?”
19. WOULD YOU: “Would You Trade $2 for Our Famous
Brick-Oven Pizza?”

100

Ad-Agency Secrets
20. CAN YOU: “Can You Be Sure Your Child Won’t Get
Kidnapped?”
21. IF YOU: “If You Hate Cleaning Your Pool, This Ad
Brings Good News!”
22. STARTING TODAY: “Starting Today You Can Dance
97% Better...If You Follow These Rules.”

Ad-Agency Secret #6: 12 Ways to
Lure Readers Into Your Copy
You’ve written a great headline that targets your prospects and compels them to read more. You’ve briefly captured their attention, stirred
their curiosity, and tapped their desires. You don’t want to lose them now!
But how do you start writing the body copy in a way that flows naturally
from your headline and doesn’t jar them out of this coveted—and potentially profitable—state of mind? Here are 12 easy ways to do it, based
on successful results from hundreds of business-winning print ads.
Each of the following 12 examples uses the same headline as a springboard for our variations. The headline is:
“Just Released! Psychologist’s Study Reveals Little-Known
Speaking Patterns That Immediately Put Rude Salespeople
in Their Place.”
1. Continue the Thought in the Headline:
“You know the rude salespeople we mean. The ones with
the big mouths who don’t understand the word no. The
ones who push and push and won’t leave you alone....”
2. Ask a Question:
“How would you handle yourself in a sticky situation like
this?”
3. Quote a Respected Authority:
“According to communication psychologist R. Butler
Sinclair, there’s no need for anyone to feel intimidated
by the high-pressure tactics used by....”
4. Give ’Em a Free Taste:
“The next time you’re confronted by a pushy salesperson, do this: Wait until he is finished speaking. Then raise

101

CA$HVERTISING
your left hand to your mouth and say, ‘You know, you
really didn’t....’”
5. Challenge Them to Prove It Works:
“Here’s what we want you to do. Read pages 8 and 9 of
this incredible new book—no more. Then go to the dealership with the reputation for the most obnoxious and
belligerent....”
6. Start With a Story of Skepticism:
“When we first received the manuscript from the author,
we were skeptical. But some of us in the editorial office
actually tried some of Sinclair’s tricks, and we were absolutely blown away.”
7. Tell What Others Are Saying (Bandwagon Effect):
“Nobody hates obnoxious salespeople more than I do.
So when I first saw the ad for this book I though it was too
good to be true. It is, in fact, the most powerful book I’ve
ever read on dealing with rude coworkers, salespeople,
and mothers-in-law. —Bob Manstreth, Philadelphia, Pa.”
8. Play Reporter:
“Philadelphia, PA—A New York psychologist has just released the findings of a seven-year study that explains
how any man or woman can use the power of a new type
of communication psychology to deal with obnoxious
people.”
9. Get Personal With You, You, You:
“Have you ever been hassled by a salesperson who can’t
take no for an answer? Do you hate when people push
you around and manipulate you? Would you like to know
a powerful new way to instantly put these obnoxious
people in their place? A way that gives you the upper
hand....”
10. Tell a Dramatic Story:
“According to communication psychologist R. Butler
Sinclair, there’s no longer any need for anyone to feel
intimidated by the high-pressure tactics used by....”

102

Ad-Agency Secrets
11. Give Super-Detailed Specs:
“This amazing new book—a hefty 8 1/2 × 11-inch leatherbound, hardcover beauty—is jam-packed with over 327
pages, 10 information-filled chapters, and 45 of the most
effective new communication tools ever developed for....”
12. Lure them with a Very Short First Sentence:
“Don’t you hate it?”
“It’s so annoying!”
“It makes me sick.”
“I can’t stand it!”

Ad-Agency Secret #7:
360 Degrees of Attention-Getting Power
Imagine a police lineup of 10 thugs. They’re dressed like thugs.
They have angry thug expressions. Scary thug teeth. Lousy thug shaving habits. And an overall aura of “thugosity.” Standing in the middle
of these upstanding citizens is a dapper gentleman that looks like he
just stepped off his Gulfstream G550 private jet. Wow, does this guy
look wealthy, or what? That suit! Those shoes! That million-dollar smile!
Question: Who stands out in the police lineup? Differences attract.
“In a litter of 10 puppies, the purple pooch gets all the attention.”
Thugs and puppies aside, in advertising we know that one way to
get people’s attention is via graphic design. Our goal isn’t to make our
advertising look the way everyone else’s does. We want to stand out,
don’t we? But how many advertisers actually do? Very few. Prove it to
yourself. Stop reading for a moment and grab your local newspaper.
What shape are most ads? Without ever seeing the paper you’re reading, I know that most are square, followed by rectangle. Over and over,
and over...the same two shapes. Not because that’s what’s proven to be
most effective. (It hasn’t.) But simply because these shapes allow publishers to optimize their sales space. It’s easy to fit them side by side.
So be a rebel, break away from the copycat pack, stand out on even
the most crowded newspaper pages by running an eye-grabbing circle
ad. The advertising industry publication Printer’s Ink reported the effectiveness of this simple technique decades ago, but few advertisers
know about it, and even fewer have ever used it. Instead of the typical

103

CA$HVERTISING
rectangle or square, have your ad set within a circular border. (Run your
copy the standard way; don’t curve it around the interior of the circle.)
Circular ads get more attention and yours will stand out—dramatically—
from your “square” competition.
Simply ask your printer or newspaper (or better still, a graphic designer) to set your copy in a circular border that fits into the square ad
space size you’re buying. To emphasize the circle even more, fill with
black—or the color of your choice—everything from the outside edge
of the circle, all the way to the inside edges of the square that contains
it. This leaves you with the entire inside of the circle for your copy.
Because of its shape, you’ll naturally have more horizontal room in the
exact center of the circle than you will at the top and bottom. It’s a real
eye-catcher. And I don’t care how many other ads your ad is surrounded
by, yours will stick out like a neon sign in a sea of sameness.
Successful small-space ads exploited their unusual
shapes to enhance the depiction of the product. Poor
ones tried to pack too much information into their ads
and too little attention was paid to drawing in the
reader in the first place.
—“Great Newspaper Ads,” Marketing Magazine,
February 5, 2001

Ad-Agency Secret #8:
The Reverse-Type Pitfall
“Oh no! Don’t reverse it! Stop! Don’t you dare print white letters on
a dark background!”
You may have heard this one, from graphic designers, copywriters,
creative directors, consultants, newspaper ad-sales reps, and other
knowledgeable advertising people. But have you ever asked them, “Why
not?” Chances are, they’ll tell you, “It’s harder to read,” and nothing
further.
Have you followed this advice? You should. Because the principle is
grounded in sound psychological principle and fact. How about your
Website? Your HTML ads? Your printed materials?
This no-no is called reversing or knocking out type. Unless your ad is
surrounded, literally crammed by other ads on a Website, newspaper

104

Ad-Agency Secrets
page, or anywhere else, don’t do it. Studies show that reversing makes
your copy dramatically less readable. Why?
Because the eye is not accustomed to reading in reverse. Especially
if the type is small. Unfortunately, I’ve seen everyone from tiny family
shops to giant corporations make this blunder. How many Websites have
you seen on which the background is darker than the type? Very difficult to read.
Exception to the rule? Reversing out of a solid background can be
effective with headlines when the type is large and the words are few;
for example: “Free Chocolate Truffles!” or “Win This NewLamborghini!”
Then again, you could probably print those headlines in yellow ink on
white paper and they’d probably pull like crazy. But what’s the background of this long-repeated admonishment? Rather than just tell
you not to do it, you should understand why advertising professionals
give you this advice...even though most of them have no idea themselves.

Experiment #1:
Mr. Holmes and His “Critical Sixty-Six”
In an article entitled “The Relative Legibility of Black Print and
White Print,” published in the Journal of Applied Psychology in 1931, a
researcher by the mysterious name of G. Holmes performed a test using short words. Some words were printed in black ink on white paper,
and others in white type on a black background. The same font and
type size was used for all words. Good ol’ Mr. Holmes displayed both
words at a distance, far enough away so that his subjects could not read
them. He then said, in effect, “OK gang, move forward only as close as
necessary to read these words.”
His findings? G. discovered that words set black on white (not reversed) could be read at a distance of about 66 inches, whereas the
white on black (reversed) words could not be read until the subjects
were closer, approximately 55 inches. Bottom line? Reversing makes type
less legible.

Experiment #2:
Daniel Starch and the Eyeball Slowdown
Our advertising researcher friend Daniel Starch performed an experiment that agreed with Holmes’s findings. Starch had participants

105

CA$HVERTISING
read a short, non-reversed passage. “Read this!” he barked. In fact, the
average participant read it at just faster than six words per second. Next,
he had them read a passage printed in reverse. The speed? Just faster
than four words per second, about two words per second slower than
non-reversed printing. Bottom line? Reversing slows down reading.

Experiment #3:
When P&T Speak, Everyone Listens
It was time to bring in the top guns and get to the bottom of this
whole reverse-type issue. And in they came: two psychologists, Paterson
and Tinker. The big dogs of advertising research. Wasting no time, they
repeated Starch’s experiment, but with a twist that produced interesting results. When participants were shown the black-on-white version
and were then immediately shown the reversed version, the reversed
passage was proven to be 4 percent less legible. When they were only
shown the reversed copy, it proved 16 percent less legible...statistically
significant in anyone’s book.
Verdict? Don’t reverse it. Now you won’t just be following advice like
a mindless robot. You’ll know why you’re not doing it. Go ahead...enlighten
your favorite advertising expert with this info. He or she may never
look at you the same way again.

Ad-Agency Secret #9: Crush Your
Competition With Extreme Specificity
This one idea is so powerful, it can help you establish a stranglehold on your competition. Its effectiveness has been hailed by legendary advertising masters, from the venerable Claude Hopkins (“Scientific
Advertising”) to the brilliant Eugene Schwartz (“Breakthrough Advertising”).
I call it extreme specificity, and your competitors will curse you for it.
It’s simple, and here’s what you do: From this day on, start being extremely specific every time you describe your products or services. Here’s
what I mean…
One day I conducted an experiment. I grabbed my telephone and
the Yellow Pages. I called about 25 local pizza shops at random. I said:
“Hello, I’m coming in with 10 friends this Saturday. I want to come to
your place, but one of the guys wants to go to another pizzeria. Help
me convince the group; what makes your pizza better?”

106

Ad-Agency Secrets
Call #1 Response: [Annoyed] “Uhhh...I don’t know.
That’s for YOU to decide!”
Analysis: Pathetic. Here’s a guy who was given the opportunity by a
cash-wielding customer to distinguish his restaurant from the rest. In
30 seconds, he could have won up to 10 new customers for many years.
Call #2 Response: “We use better ingredients.”
Analysis: This reply tells me nothing. It creates no positive images
in my mind, and gives me no reason to desire his pizza. The response is
too generic. Another chance to stand out from the crowd, blown.
Call #3 Response: “Better quality. Our sauce and flour
are from Italy.”
Analysis: Not great, but better! He doesn’t just say “quality,” or
“ingredients,” but he also specifies which ingredients. Then he says they’re
better because they’re true Italian ingredients. It sure sounds better than
flour and cheese made in the Bronx.
But could he have done better? Absolutely. How about telling me
what makes the cheese better, that’s it’s not just cow-milk mozzarella,
but also incredibly flavorful (and hard-to-find) buffalo milk mozzarella,
and according to true New York style tradition, the cheese is never shredded, but placed on top in chunks because shredded cheese releases too
much moisture on the pie.
The flour? Only hard, northern spring wheat because of its excellent rising qualities, crisp exterior, and chewy interior crust. But why
stop there? His sauce...ahhhh, now’s this is a thing of beauty. He refuses
to use pre-prepared sauce (like his competitors), no sir. He crushes his
own tomatoes. (And not any old tomatoes, either. He insists on “Genuine San Marzano” tomatoes from Italy!) Olive oil? Only extra-virgin
Olivieri, of course. The dough is hand-stretched—not flatted by steel
rollers in a mindless machine like those big-chain guys. His pizza masterpieces are baked in a coal-burning oven imported directly from Italy,
which imparts an amazing flavor, unmatched by the competition’s plain
old gas ovens.
Meats and vegetables? His competitors use pre-processed ingredients, delivered in giant, institutional-size poly bags. Here, everything is
hand-sliced fresh every morning. Herbs? He grows fresh basil and
oregano for maximum flavor. And talk about atmosphere! His cozy dining room was recently renovated floor-to-ceiling, nearly doubled in size,
and with his big new booths, it’s far more comfortable than most other

107

CA$HVERTISING
pizza shops’ cheap plastic chairs. Look at that gorgeous Italian tile and
fabulous artwork. As if all that wasn’t enough, his family has been
handcrafting pizza for four generations. You taste 80 years of pizzabaking mastery with every crispy bite.
“But Drew! Does any of this really matter in today’s “charge-theconsumer-more-and-give him-less” world?” Yes. It matters more than
ever, especially because no one else is doing it. One of the most powerful things you can do is educate your prospects about the specifics of
your product or service. Once educated—assuming your product is at
least as good as the competition—they’ll better appreciate what you’re
offering. Think...what interesting story can you tell people about your
product or service? How can you educate them about what you do or
how you do it?

A Tale of Two Restaurants
Restaurant #1, Luigi’s, tells you it has wonderful home cooking.
Chicken parmesan, spaghetti, manicotti, and more. Plus, a coupon. Yes,
that’s the entire ad. Gee guys, the idea in advertising is to stand out,
differentiate yourself, and persuade people to take action. I give Luigi’s
credit for the coupon, but the rest of the ad doesn’t give any compelling
reasons to redeem it.
Now let’s look at Restaurant #2, Fratelli’s. Similar to Luigi’s, they
list what they serve. They also give a coupon. But they do much more,
by giving extreme specifics about their food. They differentiate themselves in the marketplace by saying things people want to know:
“We make our bread fresh every day, golden and crusty.
Our pasta is made from scratch. We use only fresh herbs
in all our recipes. Only pure, cold-pressed 100-percent
virgin olive oil is served. Spring water fills your glass,
mellow Italian music fills the air, and softly glowing
candles light your table.”
Wow! Can you feel the difference? Yes...it’s actually a feeling. You get
a better feeling for Fratelli’s. The ad tells you more. It’s not just trying
to sell you. It’s actually wooing you. The words put pictures in your
head and cause you to demonstrate the food and atmosphere in your
head long before you step through the door.
How many restaurants go this far to educate you about what they
do? Even if every other restaurant in the city does the same exact thing,
because no one else is saying it, the one who does say it, wins! So ask

108

Ad-Agency Secrets
yourself: “What can I say about my product or service that may be obvious to me, but my market knows little about? Can I tell them about the
processes used, the time, money, and effort expended? How can I point
out the major advantages of my product and make people begin to
question the quality of my competition?”
Here’s how another business uses this technique.

A Tale of Two Hardware Stores
What do most independent hardware stores do in their ads? Very
little. They’re often no more than business cards with a quick mention
of the few items they have on sale. Consider the copy from the following two ads.
Hardware Store #1:
Hammers, screwdrivers, power tools, home fix-up, lawn
and garden equipment. Paulson’s has the hardware you’re
looking for...at neighborhood-friendly prices!
Hardware Store #2:
Handyman Jack’s is no ordinary hardware store. We’re
a Hardware Super Store! We carry 343 kinds of fasteners, 28 types of nails, 86 gauges of wire, 43 grit sizes of
sandpaper, 16 different styles of hammers, 28 kinds of
screwdrivers, 47 types of keys, a daily inventory of
354,000 bolts and screws, all the top-name power tools
for less, and a no-nonsense, money-back guarantee of
complete satisfaction.
Question: If you needed hardware and you knew nothing about
either of these stores except what you saw in the ad, and both stores
were about the same distance from your home...where would you go?
The answer is obvious: Handyman Jack’s. Even if every other hardware
store in the city carries the same exact merchandise, no one else says it.
Remember: It’s not important that people need to know all that
information. I mean, who really cares how many nails and bolts you
have, as long as you have what they want. But the psychology behind
it—the Length-Implies-Strength heuristic—makes it tremendously potent. Because hardly any other store says these things, people judge the
one who does say it to be better, more complete, more successful in some
way. Don’t you want to convey that?

109

CA$HVERTISING

O

Ad-Agency Secret #10:
The Famous Ogilvy Layout Principle

ften called “The Father of Advertising,” ad agency genius David
Ogilvy created some of the best-known ads of his day. He developed a simple layout formula that, if followed, results in eye-catching
ads that win researcher Daniel Starch’s “most-noted award.” Called the
Two-Thirds/One-Third Principle—or, more affectionately, the “Ogilvy”—
the top two thirds of the ad is one big photograph. The remaining third
of the ad consists of the headline (directly under the photo) and the
sales copy beneath the headline, often starting with a large “drop cap”—
just as I did in this paragraph—to help lure readers’ eyes into your sales
message. Your company logo tucks neatly into the lower-right corner.
If you start your body copy with a drop-initial, you
increase readership by an average of 13%.
—David Ogilvy
There’s also the Reverse Ogilvy—the One-Third/Two-Thirds variation, wherein the top third of the ad is a photo, a headline underneath
it, and the remaining two thirds is sales copy. As before, you drop your
company logo in the lower-right corner. In both cases, the headline and
body copy become, in effect, a “caption” for the photo.
Place the headline under the visual, as the eye moves to
the picture first and then moves down.
—Starch Research
Unless you know the following fact, you may not appreciate just
how clever this layout is. Studies show that up to twice as many people read
captions as body copy. Ogilvy himself advised, “More people read the captions under illustrations than read the body copy, so never use an illustration without putting a caption under it.” It’s a clever trick that’s
stood the test of time and has helped many big companies become
leaders in their respective industries. If it’s good enough for “The man
in the Hathaway shirt” and Rolls-Royce, it’s likely good enough for you
and me.

110

Ad-Agency Secrets
Don’t run pictures without putting captions under them.
Put a brief selling message or human interest message
under every illustration you use.
—John Caples

Ad-Agency Secret #11:
The Psychology of Typefaces
Typefaces can be playful. Authoritative. Creative. Beautiful. Dramatic. Fancy. Odd. Refined. And yes, even downright hideous. And
because of this, different typefaces can color our messages with different meanings. For example, you wouldn’t advertise frilly women’s lingerie using a headline set in dark, bold, and masculine Cooper Black. On
the other hand, you wouldn’t advertise your hardcore bodybuilding gym
packed with sweaty and grunting steroid-injecting monsters using Palace,
a lovely, delicate, and wispy script font. Your ad would look ridiculous! Of
course, your product may not suggest a typeface that’s so categorically
expressive of any particular emotion or visual, but no matter what typestyle
you choose, just know that it will communicate something.
It is possible to blow away three-quarters
of our readers simply by choosing the wrong
type. If you rely on words to sell, that should
concern you deeply.
—Colin Wheildon, author of Type & Layout: Are You
Communicating or Just Making Pretty Shapes?
In addition to dozens of studies done in the past few decades, several recent tests have been conducted to determine which typestyles are
easiest to read. I’ve heard a few people say, “Whatever you’re used to
reading is what’s easiest for you.”
Hogwash! Of course some typefaces are easier to read than others;
it’s ridiculous to say otherwise. Still, you can get used to scrubbing your
dirty clothes on a rock, but that doesn’t mean that pressing “start” on
your washing machine isn’t easier.

111

CA$HVERTISING
Consider the typeface called Flag Day. Each letter looks like a little
waving flag consisting of alternating and undulating horizontal black
and white stripes. It’s one of the most difficult-to-read typefaces I’ve
seen. At 24 points and under, I can’t read it. Larger than 24 points, I still
can’t read it. Even when I type my own name, I might as well have typed
the random words “Spinning Flounder Ape.” Now, I don’t care how
many typeface studies you conducted, the fact is, Flag Day is extremely
difficult to read because the letters simply don’t look like letters, but
wiggly striped blobs. I’m sure you could get used to it. But that doesn’t
mean that a clearer, plainer font such as Arial wouldn’t be far more
readable. Saying otherwise is like saying, “Heck, I’ve been using the
same dull razor blade for 28 years...using a brand new one wouldn’t be
any easier; I’m already used to the old dull one!” Huh?

Serif or Sans Serif for Printed Matter?
Do you know the difference between a serif and a sans serif typeface? Your eye certainly does. A serif typeface is one that has little
feet and embellishments on the tips and base of each letter, such
as this font. Sans (the French word “without”) serif faces, such as this
font, have no such serifs. The serifs make each letter more distinct and
recognizable.
Multiple researchers confirm that serif fonts make words easier to
read. (Wordon, 1991; Hartley, 1994). Examples of serif fonts are Times
New Roman, Palatino, Schoolbook, Georgia, Courier, Cheltenham,
Bookman, and Garamond.
In 1926, The British Medical Council reported that sans serif type
causes irradiation: an optical anomaly in which space between lines intruded into letters, creating a type of light-vibration that made reading
more difficult and uncomfortable.
In a study of comprehension, Wheildon (1986) noted that only 12
percent of participants effectively comprehended a passage set in
sans serif type, versus 67 percent of readers given a version set in a
serif typeface. Those given the sans serif version said they had a
tough time reading the text and had to “continually back-track to regain
comprehension.”
In a substantial test of several hundred thousand readers, Wheildon
set one ad in three different faces: Garamond, Times Roman (both serif),
and Helvetica (sans serif). Here’s what he found:

112

Ad-Agency Secrets
✸ Garamond was read and comprehended by 670,000
people—66 percent of the test subjects.
✸ Times Roman was comprehended by 320,000—less than
half of Garamond.
✸ Helvetica was comprehended by only 120,000 people—
12.5 percent of the subjects.
Bottom line: Serif fonts—at least on paper—are simply easier to
read. The findings are the same for virtually every researcher who’s ever
conducted the test. No wonder most newspaper and magazine publishers set their body copy in a serif typeface.
“Okay Drew, I get it, but which specific serif typeface should I use?”
Ahhh, now that question opens an entirely new can of worms. Unfortunately, I’ve seen no research that gives a definitive answer. And my studies go back as far as 1912—yikes!—when B.E. Roethlin wrote the article,
“The Relative Legibility of Different Typefaces of Printing Types,” in
the American Journal of Psychology. (Good luck Googling that!)
The closest was a study by Paterson and Tinker (1932) that revealed
no discernable differences in reading speed among the group of faces
they studied, with the exception of two styles that slowed readers: Cloister
Black (Old English), by 16.5 percent, and American Typewriter, by 5.1
percent.
That’s not to say that people don’t have their opinions.
John McWade, publisher of Before & After magazine, likes: Adobe
Caslon, Adobe Garamond, ITC Stone Serif, and Janson Text 55 Roman.
Coauthors James Craig, Irene Korol Scala, and William
Bevington, of Designing With Type: The Essential Guide to Typography,
say, “Baskerville is considered one of the most pleasant and readable
typefaces.”
Advertising copy great John Caples liked using Cheltenham Bold
for headlines.
David Ogilvy preferred the Century family, Caslon, Baskerville, and
Jenson.
Direct marketing guru Gary Halbert swore by Courier for sales
letters.
Yours truly often uses Clearface Black for headlines and Schoolbook for body copy.

113

CA$HVERTISING
Ascender Corporation’s study “Fonts on the Front Page” revealed
the 10 most popular typefaces used by the top 100 U.S newspapers (by
circulation), in order:
1. Poynter Series.
2. Franklin Gothic.
3. Helvetica.
4. Utopia.
5. Times.
6. Nimrod.
7. Century Old Style.
8. Interstate.
9. Bureau Grotesque.
10. Miller.
Until research says otherwise, using any of the serif fonts suggested
here will not only put you in good company, but will also help you create attractive, more readable sales materials.

Set Headlines in Initial Caps
Headlines Longer Than Just a Couple of Words, Such As “FREE
COOKIES!” Should Be Set in Initial Caps, a Combination of Upperand Lower-Case Letters, As in This Sentence. All upper-case letters
slowed readership by 11.8 percent (Paterson and Tinker, 1956).
New York Times editor Theodore Bernstein challenged Patterson and
Tinker’s findings and said headlines set in all caps could be read faster.
The battle raged. And when the smoke cleared, poor Mr. Bernstein ate
his caps.
Results: An 18.9 percent difference in favor of initial cap headlines—
even greater than Patterson and Tinker found in their study. Gulp.
But wait! Tinker wasn’t done. He was so fascinated by this whole
caps/lower case issue that he conducted a test to see if how much a
person blinked—yes, blinked—could be a reliable measure of readability
(Tinker, 1946).
Results: All capital letters slowed reading—no surprise there—but
he struck no gold with his eyelid-driven “blinky-blink” hypothesis.
But why do all caps slow reading? Because the eye recognizes by
outline.

114

Ad-Agency Secrets
Try this test: Draw a line around the following two words: ADVERTISING POWER, allowing your pen to touch the tops and bottoms of
each letter. The resultant shape is a rectangle, with even sides all around.
Now draw a line around the following two words set in initial caps, again
allowing your pen to touch the tops and bottoms of each letter: Advertising Power. Your pen rises and falls like a roller coaster as it goes over
the capital letters and the ascenders and descenders of the other letters.
Results: More distinct and recognizable letters and words. This translates into easier and faster reading.

Serif or Sans Serif for Online Reading?
What looks good on paper doesn’t necessarily read well on screen.
The difference? Resolution. For example, books, newspapers, flyers, and
brochures are typically printed in 300 dots-per-inch (dpi) resolution. If
you have a Mac (or MacOS compatible), you have a 72 dpi screen. If
you have a Windows PC, you have a 96 dpi screen. What looks good in
one medium doesn’t look great in another.
Google the topic, and you’ll discover more online font readability
tests than you’d believe anyone had interest in. I’ll share the bottom-line
results of a few of them, and then give you a recommendation that
considers all the findings.
Some researchers used proofreading to determine readability, such
as Tullis, Boynton, & Hersh in 1995 for their study for Fidelity Investments.
They looked at 12 different fonts in sizes from 6 to 9.75 points.
Results: The most preferred fonts were Arial and MS Sans Serif at
9.75 points.
Two other researchers (Bernard and Mills, 2000) evaluated 10- and
12-point Arial and Times New Roman fonts.
Results: No reliable differences in reading speed or in error detection. However, the readers said they preferred the 12-point fonts.
Bernard didn’t stop there. He put three different font sizes (10, 12,
and 14 points) in eight different typefaces on the chopping block (Bernard,
et al., 2001)— four serif fonts: Century Schoolbook, Courier New, Georgia, and Times New Roman, and four sans serif fonts: Arial, Comic
Sans, Tahoma, and Verdana.
Results:
1. Subjects read Arial and Times New Roman faster than
Courier, Schoolbook, and Georgia.

115

CA$HVERTISING
2. Subjects read the 12-point fonts faster than the 10-point
fonts.
3. Subjects preferred all the fonts—except Century
Schoolbook—over Times New Roman.
In 2002, the Software Usability Research Laboratory published the
results of a study titled “A Comparison of Popular Online Fonts: Which
Size and Type is Best?”
Results:
1. The most legible fonts were Arial, Courier, and Verdana.
2. At 10 points, participants preferred Verdana. Times New
Roman was the least preferred.
3. At 12 points, Arial was preferred and Times New Roman
the least preferred.
4. The preferred font overall was Verdana, and Times New
Roman was the least preferred.
Bottom line: For easiest online reading, use Arial for 12-point text
and larger. Smaller than 12 point? Verdana, but rarely go smaller than
10 point. For a more formal look, use Georgia. For older readers, use 14
point.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Set long headlines in black. Other colors—
yes, even red—are more difficult to read. White backgrounds are best,
followed by yellow. And just as with hardcopy printing, avoid reversing
text, as discussed in Ad Agency Secret #8: The Reverse-Type Pitfall.

Ad-Agency Secret #12:
Insist on the Pro-Design Difference
Owning a hammer doesn’t make you a carpenter. Having a scalpel
doesn’t make you a doctor. And using graphic design software does not
make you a graphic designer. So, I beg you, don’t design your own sales
materials. I’ve seen ads that were so amateurish they looked as though
they were designed by Miss Susan’s Romper Room class. Your image is
critical—especially when promoting to those who don’t know you. Many
sales are won and lost simply by how you graphically represent yourself.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Call some local ad agencies, ask to speak
to the art or creative director, and say, “Hello, my name is [your name
here] and I’m hoping you could help me. I run a small business and

116

Ad-Agency Secrets
I’m putting together an [ad, brochure, flyer]. Could you recommend a
good freelance designer?” They usually work with several, so ask for a
few. Or, if you choose to find a designer online, be sure to review his or
her portfolio. Ask how much he or she charges, and whether he or she
bills hourly or per project. Some are expensive, some not. Many charge
depending upon how big a company they think you are. (Hint: don’t
sound big.) Or, if money’s tight, call local graphic arts schools. They
can usually recommended students who’d be thrilled to do the job
cheaply. But before spending a penny, ask for samples. Some will be
great; others will make you run away in horror.

Ad-Agency Secret #13:
The Power of Questions
What kind of questions? Any kind! Just look at the writing in this
book. You’ll see many examples of this ploy. What does it do? (The last
sentence is a perfect example.) It causes your prospects to desire the
answer. So what happens? They continue reading to find out the answer.
I love this technique. Why? Because it works like a lure to help me capture greater readership. Use it in headlines. Use it in subheads. And of
course, us it in your body copy.
According to neuro-linguistic programming (NLP) proponents,
questions create what’s called an open loop in the reader’s brain. Want an
example? (Note the open loop I just created.) Do you want to know one
simple technique that will triple your coupon response with no additional cost
or effort? Did you catch your own response? If you’re similar to most
other businesspeople, you probably responded (at least internally) with
a yes. Because you want to know the answer to that question, I have
effectively “installed” an open loop in your brain.
The hypothesis is that once the open loop is installed, the brain will
continue to search for information in order to close the loop. And although I’ve seen no scientific research to support that claim, questions
are a powerful way to keep people reading. I know a business trainer
who uses this technique. Instead of just rambling, he continually inserts questions into his talks. Every question grabs his audience’s attention and challenges them to answer it. Asking questions keeps everyone
alert because it acts like mini “pop quizzes that help keep listeners on
their toes.”

117

CA$HVERTISING
So now that I’ve revealed this little ploy, be alert to how I use it in
this book, okay? Notice how it affects you and how it turns what would
otherwise be a monologue into something that feels more like a two-way
conversation.

Ad-Agency Secret #14:
The “Granny Rule” of Direct Mail
Let’s say you’re face-to-face with a salesman named Larry. Larry
sells seafood. (And he smells like it too.) Today Larry would like to sell
you lobsters, and he thinks you’ll be a darn good prospect.
First, Larry will try to establish rapport with you. According to the
American Heritage Dictionary, rapport is “a relationship of mutual trust
or emotional affinity.” In other words, Larry wants you to like him. That
way, you’ll be more likely to buy his big ol’ lobsters.
To influence you to like him, Larry will “meet you in your world” by
talking about things to which you can relate. If you like cars, he’ll talk
about the gorgeous new Lexus LF-A Roadster. If you like Mexican food,
he’ll tell you about Las Palomas, a cozy little restaurant on the waterfront in Puerto Vallarta that makes killer margaritas the size of your
head. If you like dogs, he’ll show you a picture of his adorable flatcoated retriever, Joey. If Larry does everything right, you’ll begin to
think that Larry is a lot like you. Larry, therefore, has succeeded in
establishing rapport. You’re now more likely to accept what he says, and
buy what he sells. (Sound familiar? It’s Consumer Psychology Principle
#10—the Cialdini Liking cue.)
After a bunch of preliminary yakking, Larry will eventually open his
briefcase and pull out all kinds of samples to further entice you to buy
his freshly caught—and still snappin’—lobsters.
Now, let’s make an analogy. Sales letters are like Larry’s words. They’re
personal, one-on-one, and try to “meet you in your world.” Brochures,
by contrast, are like Larry’s briefcase: impersonal, and filled with samples,
photos, and complete details. Each component works in a different way
for the same end result: the sale.
Remember: Advertising is a salesperson in print, a salesperson
broadcasted to the masses.
Your sales letter is your salesperson. Think of it that way! It should
be personal. A good salesperson wouldn’t greet you by saying, “Hello,
Occupant...,” and neither should your sales letter. It should meet your

118

Ad-Agency Secrets
prospects in their world. Suppose you’re mailing to teenagers (big spenders!), don’t say:
Dear Justin:
The weekend is young and most of your friends have already made plans well in advance. You, however, sit at
home staring at the telephone.
Instead, say:
Hey Justin...
If you’re sick and tired of staying home every weekend
doing nothing but surfing the Web when all your friends
are out partying up a storm...
Do you feel the difference? It’s actually a feeling! It’s more positive,
upbeat, youthful, exciting, and personal. A good salesperson doesn’t
talk like a robot:
It is recommended that you act promptly regardless of
the nature of your present dating situation.
UGH! Instead, a good salesperson talks like a human being:
Hey Justin, haven’t you had your eye on that hottie long
enough? Aren’t you sick of just sitting back and letting
every other guy with more guts ask her out? Come on, try
my Instant Confidence System...if it doesn’t work, I’ll return your money by PayPal within 48 hours. What could
be fairer?
The best way to write any advertising is to start by making a list of all
the benefits your product or service offers. So go ahead, write them
down. Don’t just say, “Yeah, yeah. I don’t feel like writing them down—
I know what the benefits are in my head.” Do it! And remember: Write
only the benefits, not the features. (Refer to Ad Agency Secret #2: Bombard Your Readers with Benefits for a quick refresher.) After you’ve completed your list, rank them in order of importance—to your customer,
not to you. That is, list the benefit you feel is the strongest selling point
as #1, and so on, down the list. When you’re done, you’ll have a list of
the key selling points of your product.
Now take the #1 benefit and work that benefit into the opening of
your letter.

119

CA$HVERTISING
CA$HVERTISING Tip: It’s always a good idea to work the idea of
ease and quickness into your first sentence. That’s because we live in a
quick-fix society. People want ease and speed. If what you offer lends
itself to these appeals, then use them! For example:
Do you want a fast, easy way to coax your car to get 22
percent better gas mileage?
Do you want a fast way to pack on 20 pounds of lean
muscle without heavy weight training or crazy dieting?
Would you like to know a simple, 5-minute trick that guarantees to improve your memory, or double your money
back?
Do you know about the FBI-tested interrogation technique
that instantly reveals if someone is lying to you?
Whether you’re sending an e-mail or a hardcopy letter, your salutation is most effective when it’s personalized. “Dear Bob” is always better
than “Dear Friend.” When you can’t personalize, try using a salutation
that connotes how your prospect will change after buying your product: “Dear Weekend Warrior,” or “Dear Soon-to-Be-Millionaire.” And
please, never ever say “Dear Occupant”! You’d slam the door in my
face if I came to your house with that “powerful” opener.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Start your letter with a question. It’s an
extremely effective device for getting people to read deeper.
Remember: The purpose of your first sentence and paragraph is to
get people to read your second sentence and paragraph. And so on.
Keep this in mind when you write so that your sentences flow smoothly
into each other, like hot fudge over creamy French vanilla custard.
Now, back to our opening sentence. Asking a question in your first
sentence—especially one that starts, “Do you want...?”—and following
it with an extremely positive benefit, is a great way to keep your prospect
reading.
Do you want to know the secret of making killer FAT-FREE
cheesecake?
Do you know how to buy LUXURY real estate for 50% off
market value?
Do you know the secret of getting FREE yoga lessons in
your area?

120

Ad-Agency Secrets
Do you want to DOUBLE, even TRIPLE your reading speed
in 3 days?
Do you see the power of these simple questions? What you’re doing
is simply asking your prospects if they want the benefit that your product gives them.
Tough talk: People expect that 99 percent of their mail will be trash. In
fact, many people open their mail over a trash can. You have only seconds
to grab their attention and stir their interest...or lose them forever.

AIDA to the Rescue
Most everyone knows the AIDA formula. It’s an age-old method of
structuring the elements of your sales message in a certain, predetermined order. It stands for Attention, Interest, Desire, Action. It says
that your #1 job is to grab people’s attention. Then you build interest. Next
you stimulate desire. And finally you push your reader to take action.
Say, for example, that you discovered the cure for cancer. You excitedly write to the FDA to announce the good news. Assuming you didn’t
know the AIDA technique, you shove your letter into an envelope that
looks like the thousands of other envelopes the FDA gets every day.
Imagine...they’ll probably open their electric bill before your letter about
the cure for cancer! No good. You need to somehow make your envelope stand out from the others.

Do you know how to tease?
The message on your outside envelope (called the “OSE” or “carrier” in agency circles) is referred to as the “teaser.” The teaser can either give information about your offer or be totally non-content-specific.
In my opinion, you should rarely use informational teasers on your
OSE unless your product is pin-point targeted to your mailing list—
and hopefully it is. Why? Because teasers immediately tell the recipient
that the envelope contains a sales pitch. I’d much rather use nonspecific teasers such as, “PERSONAL ATTENTION OF:,” “PERSONAL
LETTER FOR:,” or “IMPORTANT LETTER FOR:” typed above the
addressee’s name and address, if anything at all.

Try these tips
Try brightly colored envelopes. Rubberstamp or print the word,
“URGENT” in bloodred ink. Use lots of stamps of smaller denominations on the front, rather than just one stamp. And here’s a great trick I

121

CA$HVERTISING
use after fulfilling an information request from someone who called me
on the phone: Write a personal message on the front of the envelope,
next to their typewritten name and address, such as: “Eileen: Here’s
the Information We Talked About! —Drew.”
But what if you’ve had no phone contact, you’re mailing to a nonspecific audience, and they haven’t even requested what you’re sending? Well, how about, “Mirko: Please Read This Letter Before 9:30
Tonight! —Drew.” (Then justify the 9:30 deadline in the letter somehow, as in, it’s an ordering deadline or the like.) Or “Cyndi: Please Tell
Me if I’m Wrong About You —Drew.” The variations are endless.
These personal teasers work best with a personal-looking OSE,
something that looks as though an individual—not a corporation—
created it either by hand, or with one’s personal ink-jet printer.
And now, back to our story...
After opening your envelope, the folks at the FDA will next pull out
your letter. If you didn’t know that your #1 job of each of your components (OSE, letter, brochure, and so on) is to first get attention, you
might destroy your letter’s effectiveness by grinding out some boring
nonsense that sounds as though you’re applying for a job:
Dear Mr. Manstreth:
For the past 23 years I have worked for some of the most
forward-thinking medical labs in the country. From New
York to California, I have worked for the Kennedy Institute, the Sinclair Research Center, the Rosen Clinic, and
the Lawrence Biology Lab. In all that time, I dreamed of
one day being able to write you this letter. Under the enormous funding of blah, blah, blah...
Yawn! What’s this guy’s problem? He discovered the cure for cancer
and he’s boring his reader with the energy-sapping details of his career
path? He should have FedExed it or sent a Western Union telegram for
the urgent look it deserves. Next, he should have scrapped all that boring career fluff and gotten right to the point!
Dear Mr. Manstreth:
I have discovered the cure for cancer.
I was informed by Eileen Axelrod to set an appointment
to meet with both you and Scott Lawrence of your Investigation Center as soon as possible.

122

Ad-Agency Secrets
Enclosed are the preliminary details of my findings as well
as my medical credentials.
Please call me immediately at (213) 123-4567.
Sincerely,
I.M. Rich
Like a hungry giant octopus, the first sentence grabs the reader’s
attention using only seven simple words! Of course, I realize that your
product or service probably doesn’t carry the same weight as the cure
for cancer (no matter how good your return policy), so let’s look at
some others, shall we?

Start your sales letters this way
Let’s say you sell a tear gas spray to women. The opening of your
letter should not be:
Dear Janet,
In these days of uncertainty on our streets, we continually read about the horrors that women face. We read
frightening statistics that paint a gloomy picture of blah
blah blah...
Instead, write:
Dear Janet,
Can you protect yourself against a 220-pound rapist?
Which grabbed your attention? The answer’s obvious!
Now, let’s say you sell DVDs that teach people how to be more selfconfident. Don’t write:
Dear Eric,
Recent advances in brain-mind technology are so exciting!
By simply playing a DVD, you can build self-confidence,
boost self-esteem, blah blah blah...
Instead, write:
Dear Eric,
Would you like to DOUBLE, TRIPLE, even QUADRUPLE your
self-confidence? If so, this letter will change your life.

123

CA$HVERTISING
Because in just 10 days from now, I’m going to give you
the unshakable self-confidence of the most powerful business and military leaders of this century. Read on...
Question: If you wanted to be more self-confident, which letter opening would grab your attention? Again, it’s obvious. So why don’t more
people write their advertising copy this way? Because they’re too timid.
They’re afraid of offending people. They’re more concerned with making their copy sound pretty, elegant, and graceful. Personally, I don’t
give a damn how graceful my copy sounds. I’m writing for response.
Fact: People aren’t waiting for your offer to arrive, so there’s no time
for tippy toeing. You need to make a big impact fast!
The Granny Rule says that to grab people’s attention with your
direct mail, it helps to make your mailing like something your dear
granny would send you. Imagine her, so sweet, covered with her multicolored, patchwork, hand-crocheted shawl, getting out a plain, white
envelope. She grabs an ordinary blue ball point pen. And she handwrites
your name and address. Then she grabs a piece of simple white paper
and handwrites a letter to you, calling you by name, and writing the way
grandmothers do: conversationally, warmly, with real concern for your
well being (along with a precisely metered induction of guilt so you visit
more often). She then licks the envelope, affixes a real live postage stamp,
and mails it.
The fact is, the things Granny does are actually some of the most
effective things any business can do when preparing a direct mailing—
not slick; not expensive. But simple and personal. And you know what?
Granny gets every one of her letters opened. Why? Because they look
personal! About 99 percent of the mailings today look exactly like what
they are: solicitations. They look as though they’re screaming, “Hey
Dumbo! Open this envelope fast! We’re a big company that hired an
expensive ad agency to create this mailing to shoe-horn open your wallet in 60 seconds flat!”
What a waste. Unless your mailing is so well-targeted (being mailed
to people who have proven to, or are very likely to, be interested in the
exact type of product or service you’re selling), your slick package will
most likely end up in the trash.
For example, I know that if I want to make money selling a weightgain product to body builders, I’d look for a mailing list of bodybuilders who have purchased online or via mail order, and have bought
recently, and frequently, and spent a lot of money. Anytime you buy a

124

Ad-Agency Secrets
mailing list, the most important factors, after finding names that are
likely to respond to your type of offer, are:
1. Recency of purchase (the more recent the better).
2. Frequency of purchase (the more times they bought your
type of product the better).
3. High Dollar Amount Spent (this shows greater
commitment than someone who spent just $2.50).
For example, if you can get a hotline list (folks who purchased very
recently) of people who have bought similar products and have spent
big bucks to do so, and have bought a number of times, then you have a
potentially super list for your product.
Please don’t use mailing labels to address your OSEs. It screams
“MASS MAILING HERE!” Either buy a printer that lets you feed a
stack of envelopes, or let a good letter shop spray the names in a realistic handwriting font. Or give the whole project to a senior citizens group
and pay them to hand-address the envelopes. For just a few bucks you’ll
have the most appealing form of addressing. (Plus, you would have
given a group of nice people an interesting job to do.) Handwriting
grabs attention. They’re the OSEs people usually tear into first. Why?
Because they look like a personal letter from a dear old friend.
For the sales letter? Choose a nice, readable font. I used to swear by
Courier because it looks so personal, and I still use it at times. But the
definition of a “personal-looking” font is changing, with everyone now
using serif fonts such as Times, Schoolbook, Bookman, and Palatino.
For the response device (what we ad-folk call the order form), a grandmotherly thing to do would be to never call it an “Order Form,” but a
“Personal Trial Certificate.” Or “Personal, No-Obligation Trial Certificate.” And if you can have your recipient’s name and address already
on this form, so much the better. Print it on a nice canary (yellow) paper
so it stands out from the other pieces in the mailing. Always restate the
offer on this piece. And use the big word “YES!” to the right of a square
box with a bold check mark in it connoting approval.
Master John Caples advises to always show (on the form) a small
picture of what people get when they reply. For example, if it’s an order
form for a book, show the book. Play up your guarantee too. Put your
mailing address, phone number, and e-mail and Web addresses on the
bottom of this form in case they lose the rest of your mailing. In fact,
your name and address should appear on all of your components.

125

CA$HVERTISING
And remember the scarcity factor. Be sure you stress how urgent it is
to return the form without delay. If you have a deadline to respond,
great! Make sure it not only appears in your letter, brochure, and other
materials, but also on your response device to give them an extra prod.
Remember, without a deadline, people are inclined to just “think about it.”
And lastly, include a BRE (business reply envelope) to take the last
obstacle out of the responding process, should they choose not to order
online. Hey, do you want to lose a sale because your prospect couldn’t
find a stamp, or was too lazy to address an envelope? You can even
smack a real “live” stamp on a reply envelope if you don’t have or wish
to get a business reply permit. And because people all want ultra-fast
service, use a little psychology by printing or rubberstamping in red,
“RUSH! ORDER ENCLOSED!” or “24-HOUR PROCESSING” or
some similar wording to give the reply envelope a more active, important look.
Now, go forth into the direct mail world like dear ol’ Granny and, er,
kick ass!

Ad-Agency Secret #15:
The Psychology of “Social Proof”
It doesn’t matter if you sell to doctors or pizzeria owners; people
believe testimonials. They have since the very first one was used in 1926
by Ponds, the cold-cream company. And if you’re not using them, you’re
not just missing the boat, but the 220,000-ton Royal Caribbean Oasis of
the Seas—the largest cruse ship on planet Earth!
How do you get them? Ask! Simply write a letter (or e-mail) to your
customers and say, “We want to make you famous!” Then tell them you
want their honest opinions about your product or service. Explain that
you’re putting together a new ad, brochure, Website, what have you,
and you’d like to use their testimonial along with, if they’d like, their
photo. In exchange for this, most folks will be happy with a few copies
of the finished piece to show friends and family.
For example, let’s say you’re a Website designer. You might ask questions such as, “What do you think about our design services? What
kind of response are you getting from your new site? How do our services compare with other designers you’ve used? What do you like best
about the way we do business? Are our prices reasonable? Would you
recommend us to a friend? Would you hire us again?”

126

Ad-Agency Secrets
Then, under the questions, I put a legal disclaimer that says, “I give
Flaming Radish Web Design permission to use my quotes above, in
complete or edited form, [ ] with/[ ] without my name and city/state
(your address/phone number will not be used) for advertising/publicity
purposes. As full compensation, Flaming Radish will provide me with
10 copies of the first printed piece in which my testimonial appears.”
Simply provide a signature and date line, and that’s it! It’s so easy, it
boggles my brain why more businesses aren’t using testimonials. Remember to send the copies of the printed piece. These copies are what
the law calls “consideration,” which essentially binds the agreement.
Or, if you’d prefer, send your request with $1.00. Say, “We’re enclosing
$1.00 to help cover any expenses you have in returning this form to
us.” In this case, the $1.00 becomes the consideration. And don’t allow
them to incur any expense in returning the form to you. You pay the
return postage by means of a self-addressed stamped envelope (SASE).
Remember: If you want people to respond to your offer, you have
to make it as easy as possible for them! Don’t you be the lazy one!

Ad-Agency Secret #16:
The Guillotine Principle
I call this the “Guillotine Technique,” and it’s a proven eyeball-grabber.
It’s based on the notion that a head or face is the best attention-getter.
Simply put a photo of someone’s head in your ad. The face/head should
be looking directly at the reader. Smiling is generally preferable, but of
course this depends upon what type of product or service you’re offering. The screaming, distorted face of a 235-pound mugger would be a
real shocker in an ad for tear gas.
Are you a carpenter? Put a close-up of your face somewhere in your
ad! A dentist? Show your face! Not only does a face attract immediate
attention, but it gives your ad a warmer, more personal feel. Nothing
fancy is needed. Even a tiny black-and-white photo will do.
The byproduct of all this is added trust, because now you’re more
than just a nameless (and faceless!) business; you’re a real person. In
addition, the constant repetition of your photo can make you famous.
Include your face and name in all your ads, and you’ll soon become a
household word. (And possibly get stopped on the street every now and
then: “Hey, aren’t you...?”)

127

CA$HVERTISING
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Put your photo at the top of your ad and
make your headline a quote from you. For example, next to my photo in
my ad, the headline reads (quote marks included), “Give Me 90 Minutes & I’ll Show You How to Double...Triple...Quadruple Your Ad Response!” You can’t help but notice it. So give the “guillotine” a go!

Ad-Agency Secret #17: PVAs—The Easy Way
to Boost the Power of Your Copy
Question: Which of the following sentences conveys more excitement and interest to you?
1. You get six red apples hand-picked by my mother from
our backyard farm, so delicious, they’re probably the best
apples you’ve ever eaten.
2. Just wait until you sink your teeth into the sweetest,
juiciest, most mouth-watering Red Delicious apples
you’ve ever eaten! Not just one or two. But a full onedozen of these crisp, luscious beauties, each one carefully
hand-picked by my 73-year old mother from the golden,
sun-drenched orchards in our very own backyard!
The answer is obvious, isn’t it? The second paragraph is loaded
with what I call powerful visual adjectives. These PVAs produce clear, bright,
high-impact visual images. They actually help your prospects demonstrate your products in their minds.
DON’T SAY:
Make lots of money!
DO SAY:
Rake in $2,750 cash weekly!
DON’T SAY:
Juicy Red Apples
DO SAY:
Mouth-watering, sugar-sweet, hand-picked apples!
DON’T SAY:
Drink cleaner water.

128

Ad-Agency Secrets
DO SAY:
Enjoy pure, crystal-clear, glacier-fresh water!
DON’T SAY:
Get a useful line of credit!
DO SAY:
Flash your credit card, and jewelry, electronics,
home furnishings, and tropical vacations are yours!
DON’T SAY:
Earn good money selling gold at flea markets.
DO SAY:
Corner the gold market at high-traffic flea markets and
watch the dollars come pouring in!

The Bath Soap Blow-Out
I have a nice head of hair. And it’s a good thing. Because every so
often I have a “discussion” with someone on this topic that leads me to
rip much of it out. For example, I had a phone conversation with a
friend whom I’m helping create a brochure. He and his wife sell homemade soap. Very nice soaps, actually. Beautiful colors and fragrances.
Some look like nice big, juicy hunks of watermelon. Others resemble
fresh orange slices, bright lemon wedges, and meaty chunks of coconut. Yum. (Do you see what PVAs—powerful visual adjectives—can do
for your copy?) Here’s the dialog, as I remember it...
Drew: Hey George...these fruity soaps are great. But why just blandly
say, “Orange-Scented Bar Soap”? or “Coconut-Scented Bar
Soap”? Why not compare them to the freshest, juiciest slices
of Florida oranges? Why not talk about how washing your
face with it is like splashing your skin with liquid sunshine?
How the aroma reminds you of walking in the sunny, breezy
orange fields of Florida? And your coconut soap—yum! Why
just say, “Smells like real coconut”? Why not compare it to
the freshly cut coconuts in the sun-soaked western Caribbean...
reminiscent of the milky-white meaty centers and the sweet,
luscious juice?

129

CA$HVERTISING
George: That seems a little over the top, don’t you think? After all,
we’re not selling food, we’re selling soap!
Drew: Ugh. [To myself.] Of course you’re selling soap, George, but
you want to create some romance...some imagery...something
that people can latch onto. It’s called selling.
George: All that doesn’t seem necessary.
Drew: Necessary?! It’s not necessary to sell soap, George! But if you
are going to do it, why not do it well? Why not do it aggressively? Why not do more than your competition is doing? You’re
not the only one in this business, you know.
George: Uh huh.
Drew: These soaps are great! But you need to do more than your
competition. You need to stand out!
George: Well, if what you’re saying is so great, why doesn’t anyone else
do it?
Drew: Simple. Because most people don’t do things the best possible way. They do what they think is best. And since most
businesspeople don’t know much about creating effective advertising, they don’t do what could be most effective!
George: [Thinking. It sounds like a field of crickets.]
Drew: You’re selling specialty soaps. Not Ivory, Zest, or Irish Spring.
You’re selling expensive soap that has two things going for it:
(1) It looks beautiful, and (2) it smells delicious. Not playing
up the two things that make your soap so appealing is a giant
mistake! People don’t buy your soap because they simply need
to get clean. They can get clean with a cheap bar of Ivory.
George: Yes...but people will know how it smells when they buy it. Plus,
everyone knows what oranges, coconuts, and lemons smell
like. They smell like oranges, coconuts, and lemons.
Drew: [To self.]Dear God, help me.
George: ...so why take all that space to describe it to people who already know?
Drew: Because it helps persuade! Look at it this way: if someone
sees your brochure, and that someone likes the smell of oranges, then she is going to be romanced by a description that’s
in keeping with what she likes. (Read that again.) It helps her
imagine! It takes up more “space” in her brain by creating a
mental movie of the product! Describe the juicy wedges, the

130

Ad-Agency Secrets
sunny fields, the handpicking that goes on in the orchards,
that sweet bursting of aroma when you peel one. And don’t
stop there! Create a deep mental hook with a phrase she won’t
be able to shake. Something such as: “The Orange-Juicy Way
to Wash!” Don’t call it “lather,” call it “Sweet Orange-Cream
Bubbles.”
George: [Stifles laughter.] I hear what you’re saying, Drew, but all those
fancy descriptions...I can’t get over the fact that we’re just
selling soap.
Drew: [Looking at watch.] Well, George, that’s my advice. And I’ve
been doing this for only 23 years. I’m sure you’ll do whatever
you feel is right for you. Gotta run!
[The sound of ripping brown hair.]
Remember: The more specific your words—described with PV’s—
the clearer the pictures. Even if your product or service is similar to
your competitors’, you can still stand out by using this technique.
EXAMPLE #1: Cleaning Service
DON’T SAY:
“Our expert cleaners will make your office sparkle like
new.”
DO SAY:
“We make your walls and floors hospital-bright, your
restrooms sparkling and sanitized, your windows gleaming clean, and your carpets fluffy, fresh, and deodorized.”
EXAMPLE #2: Italian Restaurant
DON’T SAY:
“People love our authentic Italian food because we prepare it like we do for our own family. Try it, it’s delicious!”
DO SAY:
“We make our pasta fresh every morning. We bake our
own bread, golden and crusty.
Our sauce is made from scratch—never from cans. Everything we serve is homemade, 100 percent natural, and
delicious.”

131

CA$HVERTISING
CA$HVERTISING Tip: The business that doesn’t play the “PVA
game” automatically loses. Because the advertisers that use this technique give the impression that they’re more qualified, better equipped,
more conscientious, and better able to meet their customers’ needs.
Why? Because they’re the only ones telling the whole story, which automatically gives the impression that the others don’t do these things. It’s
a devilishly potent psychological tool that sends the competition scrambling because they’ll quickly realize the disadvantage you’ve thrust upon
them.

Ad-Agency Secret #18:
Directing Mental Movies
Answer these questions honestly:
1. Would you rather eat a fruit tart, or a big slice of deep-dish
bing cherry pie made from freshly picked, organic fruit,
and a flaky, handmade, buttery crust, topped with a big
scoop of double-churned vanilla-bean ice cream? Ooooh,
look how all the sweet cherry juice flows out every time
your fork sinks into that nice, thick slice. Yeah...put a little
whipped cream on it, will ya? Wow...did you ever see so
much fruit?!
2. Would you be more repulsed by having to kill a few bugs, or
having to destroy an active nest of angry black widow spiders, including a quivering web of their just-hatched-hot
eggs, guarded by their mindless, poison-fanged mother?
Don’t forget that just one female black widow can blow out
four to nine egg sacs every summer, each containing up to
750 eggs incubating a fresh new load of up to 750
spiderlings in just 14 to 30 days. Worse still, each venomous arachnid lives—no, mates and breeds!—inside your
home with your children and pets, for up to three full years!
Try killing them yourself if you must, but think about
this: If you miss killing just one egg-engorged female (or
one of her hundreds of nearly microscopic crawling babies), you’ll suffer a full-blown arachnid infestation in no
time! I’ve been at war with black widows for the past five
years, and there’s nothing worse than feeling something
crawling across your skin at night when you’re in bed. Well,

132

Ad-Agency Secrets
actually, one thing is worse...discovering that the “queen
mother” blew out a pile of fresh hot eggs under your pillow!
Do you see what I did? My careful word selection made plain old pie
far more appealing. And—ugh—that “little” spider problem (that you
otherwise would have handled yourself) now turns into a worthwhile
$89 call to the exterminator. So what’s happening here?
First, realize that all experience is made up of only these five
factors—V-A-K-O-G:
1. Visual (sight).
2. Auditory (sound).
3. Kinesthetic (feeling or emotions).
4. Olfactory (smell).
5. Gustatory (taste).
These elements—our senses—are the ingredients of experience. Any
time we experience anything in life, a blend of these elements is always
present. We call these elements “IRs”—internal representations—
because they represent our experience of the world around us internally,
in our heads. In fact, memory is just a blend of these elements. Whenever you recall any experience, whether it’s the pizza you ate yesterday,
or the roller coaster you screamed on 28 years ago, you’re accessing a
blend of these five elements; a set pattern that “equals” your experience.
To boost the effect of your words—no matter what kind of advertising you’re writing, be it ads, brochures, sales letters, flyers, e-mails,
Websites, billboards, or radio or TV commercials—what you need to do
is increase the strength of the representations in your prospects’ brains.
You need to ramp up the intensity of the five elements so that you
create a concentrated internal experience with sufficient power to affect
his or her behavior. This, my friend, is the secret recipe for getting people
to take action.
Let’s fact it: Your prospects are busy living their lives. They don’t
care about you or your product, but only how your product or service
can make their lives better. In most cases, for most products and services (there are exceptions), you yourself mean absolutely nothing to
them. (Gasp!)
“Drew! That’s so cynical! How can you say something so horrible?”
Relax. It’s just a way of looking at the whole process. It goes back to the
old maxim, “People don’t buy your product for its features; they buy it
for its benefits.” So the way we get people to act, to buy, to ask for more

133

CA$HVERTISING
information, is to take what’s otherwise a dull, fuzzy image in their brains,
and turn it into a sharp, super-focused, loud, colorful, tasty, fragrant,
highly sensory experience.
Own a karate school? Don’t just tell parents that you’ll teach their
kids to be more confident and get better grades. Every school says that!
Also say that their kids will never become a punching bag for the
schoolyard bully, with his dirty face, foul mouth, and clenched fists.
(Feel the difference?)
“But Drew, no one writes copy like that! A karate school typically
says, “We teach your child self-confidence and discipline, and give a
free uniform when you enroll.’ They don’t say any of that ‘dirty face,
foul mouth’ stuff!”
That’s because (1) they don’t think to write this way, and/or (2) they’re
afraid to write this way for fear of what people might think, or (3) they’re
duplicating everyone else’s mediocre ads. It’s a form of “business inbreeding,” and the end result is weak, mutant advertising that means
nothing to anybody.
Stop being afraid to use your own brain. Forge your own path and
leave your own mark. You don’t need permission from anybody to do
things your way. You be the leader. You be the one people copy because
what you’re doing is so unique. Shake people up in your industry. Why
be just another person in your industry who does nothing new, nothing
worth noting, nothing that gets people talking and buying?
Okay, did you see what we did in that spider example? We simply
enlarged, or heightened the IRs, the internal representations in our reader.
We metaphorically grabbed our reader by the arms and shook him up.
With our clear (visual) and nauseating (kinesthetic) description, We now
occupy far more space in his brain. And by doing so we have effectively
activated more brain cells by causing him to think more deeply (central
route processing, remember?) about his (now repulsive) spider ordeal.
And whenever you occupy more of people’s brains, you’re far more
likely to persuade them. More likely to get them to act. We took fuzzy
images (those with little color and detail) and sharpened them to crystal clarity.
This is why long copy consistently outsells short copy. It’s why a
salesperson who spends two hours with you will typically outsell a salesperson who spends five minutes. More time and more words lead to
more persuasion.

134

Ad-Agency Secrets
What do you sell? How can you “beef up” your descriptions? How
can you take your reader on a tour of your products or services?
As an example, I just bought an automatic pool cleaner. You hook it
up to the dedicated suction line in your pool and throw it in. It vacuums up the bottom of your pool and keeps it clean. You can leave it in
full-time if you want, and safely swim while it’s running. It costs $250
and comes with a two-year warranty.
Okay, now assume you have a pool, but no pool cleaner. Are you
ready to buy from my description? I doubt it. But why not? After all, I
told you what it does, how to hook it up, what it costs, that it’s effective,
and that it comes with a two-year warranty! What the heck more do you
need to know? Seems to me you have everything you need to make a
buying decision. I even gave you my testimonial! The fact is, you did
not buy because you were not sold. You’re not buying because you have
not amassed sufficient internal representations to spend money. You
have facts, yes, but facts alone create few IRs. Facts alone do not prime
the brain to buy.
So what do I need to say to motivate you to buy this product? I
simply need to create visual IRs, auditory (sound) IRs, kinesthetic (feelings or emotion) IRs, olfactory (smell) IRs, and maybe even gustatory
(taste) IRs—as many as practical—and tour you through the use of the
product. My goal is to make my words so clear that you actually demonstrate the product in your mind before you buy it. For example:
Dear Scott,
Oh my God, this new pool cleaner I just installed is amazing! You HAVE to buy one for your own pool! It’s by far
the easiest pool cleaner I’ve ever used, and believe me, I
did my research.
It’s a long, ribbed plastic hose that attaches to your
vacuum line or skimmer. It looks like a blue manta ray
(about 2 feet long), and it skims gracefully across the
bottom of the pool. It almost looks alive, so I named it
“Squidly Diddly.” :-)
Anyway, Squidly climbs the walls, and sucks all the leaves,
sand, and other nasty stuff through its tiny mouth and
conveniently deposits it into your filter basket for quick
removal.

135

CA$HVERTISING
He even comes with a video that helps you put it together
in less than 10 minutes. It’s so easy my retriever Giuseppe
could do it!
The company is well-known in the industry and has sold
more than 1,250,000 of these cleaners worldwide. I did
a ton of research before buying it, and all the reviews
are favorable, far better than other pool cleaners in this
price range. Price? It was only $250 and comes with a
two-year warranty, and a $50 rebate!
I had one question and got someone on the phone
fast...she was really friendly and helpful.
(Ha! While I was typing this, my wife came into the house
and told me that the pool filter was LOADED with the junk
that Squidly slurped out. This thing really works like crazy!)
[NOTE FROM DREW: The paragraph above is part of the sell
copy. It’s worded to “step out of ” the context of an ad and convey a sense of “here and now,” or real-time authenticity, as I
discussed at the start of this chapter.]
Squidly makes a funny chuga-chuga-chuga sound when
he’s doing his job, but he’s pretty darn quiet. He works so
well we had to put a bucket near the filter so we had a
more convenient place to dump all the junk he sucks out
of our pool. (Remember how brown and muddy-looking
our pool was last week? You should see the water now...it
sparkles like a Caribbean lagoon, and I swear it even
smells better too!)
Forget hand-vacuuming your pool! With my pal Squidly
all I do is relax and sip piña coladas while he cleans the
pool for me, day and night. He never misses a day, never
complains, and never raises his prices. (Oh, by the way,
I’m going to lay off Frank, the pool cleaner, next week.
He’s really a nice guy, but this automatic cleaner will save
me $850 a year!)
The lesson is simple: Unless you create sufficient internal representations in your prospects’ brains, you will insufficiently move them to
mentally create their own IRs that ultimately cause them to pull out
their wallets and buy what you’re selling.

136

Ad-Agency Secrets
Of course, you won’t always be able to use all five modes of internal
representations. If you’re a printer, for example, you’re not going to tell
people how wonderfully fruity your red and orange inks tastes (gustatory). But you could talk about how quality papers, glossy and smooth
or rich with cottony texture (kinesthetic), can make their stationery so
much more visually appealing, and how people will actually feel (kinesthetic) the quality when they hold their letters and brochures. This, in
turn, translates into an unconscious association of quality with your
company, and your products and services as well.
It’s like jump-starting a car battery: Unless you apply enough juice,
the car won’t start. It’s the same with the mental movies you install in
your prospects’ brains: Unless you create a “movie trailer” that’s engaging enough to cause them to think more about what you’re saying, they’ll
simply turn the page or click away to another site.

Ad-Agency Secret #19:
Battling Human Inertia
I often begin my seminars in character: an old, stodgy salesman. I
plant myself in a chair in front of my audience and drone on, in my
most unenthusiastic voice, the most unmoving, uninspiring, unconvincing and un-everything sales pitch you could imagine. “No need to
rush into the buying decision,” I say. “Most likely dozens of other companies sell the same product at the same price, and offer you the same service. There’s plenty of time; the product will be here when you need it.”
Ugh! I then leap from my chair and shout, “If the old expression is
true that advertising is nothing more than a salesperson in print, then
THAT (pointing back to the chair I sprang from), I assert to you, is the
typical salesperson that the average business has out there on the street
representing them today!”
The point? No matter how slick a salesperson, no matter how beautiful an ad, if they don’t cause people to take action, they’re both a lousy
investment. An ad that only informs and doesn’t move people to buy is
like a salesperson who can’t close. Fire the salesperson. Trash the ad.
They’re wasting both your money and time.

137

CA$HVERTISING
The simplest definition of advertising, and one that will
probably meet the test of critical examination, is that
advertising is selling in print.
—Daniel Starch
Getting action requires two steps: (1) Make it easy to act, and then
(2) ask for action.
Disclaimer: These ingredients do not guarantee people will act. If
that were the case, then every ad you place that conformed to these two
steps would be a smashing success. However, you will significantly raise
the chances of your success. That would be okay, wouldn’t it? So let’s
talk about Step 1: Make it easy to act.
As Joan Rivers says, “Can we talk?” We humans are lazy creatures. If
we could push a button for almost everything that’s now buttonless,
we’d do it. Push-button shower? Push-button drive to work? Pushbutton push-button! In fact, there are few things left anymore that do
not offer push-button convenience. We want to be satisfied now. We
want results yesterday.
This means that people are hypersensitive to things that appear to
be troublesome. We resist “getting involved.”
For example, at the scene of a car accident a driver asks a bystander
to be a witness. He replies, “Oh, I’d rather not get involved.” The bystander is running a movie in his head filled with unpleasant scenes of
all kinds of hassles, ordeals, and bothersome tasks requiring an unknown expenditure of energy. So he turns and walks away. And because
people are hypersensitive to exerting themselves, and they do whatever
they can to avoid effort, as advertisers it would be wise for us to make
buying as easy as possible.
For example, did you ever get a direct-mail solicitation with an order
form that’s already filled in with your name and address? It requires
you to do nothing more than add your credit card number or a check,
and slip it into a postage-paid envelope that’s also personalized with
your return address. Today’s digital printing makes this easy and costeffective. There’s also a toll-free phone number. Maybe they even let
you pay C.O.D. because they know if they do most of the work for you,
they’re removing roadblocks that might prevent you from ordering.
They’re greasing the slide, so to speak, and looking for an unconscious
“Gee, look how easy!” response.

138

Ad-Agency Secrets
Accept as many alternate forms of payment as possible: all the major credit cards, personal checks, money orders, and PayPal. You should
offer several shipping options, from regular ground to overnight express (you could lose business if you don’t ship fast enough). Giftwrapping saves your customers time and effort on birthdays and
holidays. Offer a strong guarantee to quell their fear of loss. Offer a
payment plan—“Just $14.99 a month for three months”—to reduce
the psychological pain of spending money. Offer Web ordering, especially when your competition doesn’t. Tell your prospects exactly how to
order, step by step. If you’re a retailer, always provide your address,
phone, and concise driving directions (not everyone uses a GPS) and
your daily hours. Say, “It’s Easy To Order!” And use variations of it that
are suitable for your type of business: “It’s Easy to Get a FREE Estimate!”
or “It’s Easy to Schedule Your Home Inspection!” or “It’s Easy to Get
Business Cards Printed for 50 percent Off!” or “It’s Easy to Steam Clean
Your Own Carpets & Save $199!” and an endless stream of variations.
People want more ease in their lives. Tell them how easy it is to buy from
you.

Ad-Agency Secret #20: Establish
Your Unique Selling Proposition
If you’ve attended my seminars, you know that I’m adamant about
using some type of gimmick or USP—unique selling proposition—to
differentiate yourself in the market. You don’t want to be like a 5-pound
bag of sugar or salt in the grocery store, do you? Few people are fussy
about what brand of sugar or salt they buy. To them, sugar is sugar. Salt
is salt. In fact, ask a friend, “What’s your favorite brand of salt?” He’ll
look at you like you’re nuts.
The truth is, most people don’t care much about these commodity
products. They don’t stand out. They blend in with other brands. The
result? They are not preferred.
Fact: When people can’t distinguish you from your competition,
they have no reason to prefer you. And your goal in business is to have
people prefer your product, to choose you over everyone else offering
the same or a similar thing.
I grew up in northeast Philadelphia. About a mile from my home
was (and still is) a little ’50s-style diner called Nifty Fifty’s at the busy
corner of Grant Avenue and Blue Grass Road. This place does an incredible job of differentiating itself from its competitors—the lunch and

139

CA$HVERTISING
dinner lines busting through their doors onto the sidewalk prove it. It’s
located in a shopping center built about 30 years ago. In its exact location was a dance studio, a woman’s fitness center, a Mexican food joint,
a video rental store, and I don’t recall what else. But it’s the only business that has succeeded—and in a major way—and has now expanded
to five locations. No wonder: The place just does everything right. In
fact, check out the awards page on the Website at www.niftyfiftys.com—
it’s phenomenal. And this is the whole point: the proprietors don’t keep
their greatness to themselves.
Don’t try to be amusing. Spending money
is a serious matter.
—Claude Hopkins
On the contrary. They take every opportunity to make sure you know
how wonderful they are, by making sure you know that they never use
frozen beef, that their hamburger beef is ground fresh daily, that their
French fries are fresh-cut and homemade, that they never use frozen
onion rings. In fact, as soon as you walk through the front door, you can
look through a big glass window into the kitchen and see the man wearing the paper hat dipping the big, juicy-sweet onion slices into their
homemade batter and then into their wonderful, herb-seasoned breading. They tell you what kind of oil they fry in. They tell you why it’s to
your advantage to eat there rather than Burger Slop down the block.
They don’t just leave it up to you and hope you discover these things,
like 99.9 percent of other businesses do. They’re proactive. They toot
their own horn. They tell you why they’re great.
Think! What interesting story can you tell people about your product or service? How can you educate them?
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Be sure your product or service is one of
excellent quality, or you may educate your potential buyer away from you!
✸ Don’t be just a hardware store...be “The Hardware
Superstore!”
✸ Don’t be just an office cleaner...be “The Office Cleaning
Technicians!”
✸ Don’t be just a small pet shop...be “A World of Pets
Under One Small Roof!”

140

Ad-Agency Secrets
✸ Don’t be just a graphic designer who lives in Denver...be
“Denver’s #1 Graphic Design Persuader!”
✸ Don’t be just an ice-cream shop...be “The Home of
Monster Dip!”
✸ Don’t be just a real estate sales office...be the “Experts of
the RapidSell System!”
If you don’t have a “RapidSell System,” then get creative and put
together a program that you can call the RapidSell System. Sometimes
developing your USP requires that you do things differently, not just
develop a hot tag line. Just saying you’re an expert doesn’t make you
one. Your positioning should reflect what’s true about you. And if you
think up a great USP but it’s not quite who you are, then make it who
you are!
For example, if I wanted to call myself the Office Cleaning Technicians, but my staff looked like a bunch of unmotivated bums dressed in
sloppy street clothes, my “Cleaning Technicians” positioning wouldn’t
go very far, would it? The word would spread that my people aren’t
technicians at all, but slovenly bums. So what would I do?
First, I’d hire people who look and act the part. (Image goes only so
far. There comes a time when you have to perform and quality performance is the thing that gets you repeat business.) Next, I’d dress my
people all in “hi-tech” blue or orange jumpsuits with my newly designed logo on their sleeves. I’d repaint my van and have a designer put
my new image on each. I’d redesign my stationery and hire a designer
to create a fresh new brochure incorporating the clean, modern look I’d
want to portray. Now my “Technician” positioning has a chance to
make it in the marketplace. Now it’s backed up with something other
than just an impressive tag line. What I say I am and how I’m perceived
are now congruent. This is how you make your business fit your new
positioning.
My CA$HVERTISING seminar prompted a woman to stop referring to herself as just another printer, and instead start powerfully promoting her services as “The Business Image Maker!” And to back up
her claim, she submits articles to her local newspaper and business
publications telling readers how to get the most for their printing dollar. She offers free reports such as, “How to Use 10 Little-Known Printing Secrets to Make Your Business Look More Professional,” “How to
Use the Power of Color to Make Your Business Materials Stand Out!”

141

CA$HVERTISING
and others. The reports are simply one to four pages and are a snap to
produce.
She also holds free printing clinics at libraries for local businesses
where she shows samples of good printing and bad, and tells her audience how to avoid making the same mistakes. She tells them how to get
the most bang for the buck. She explains how to save thousands by
knowing the latest digital printing technology and more. They love her,
and in return they give her their business. Her image helps her by positioning her—and not her competition—as the go-to expert they can
trust. This woman went from simply running a printing press to being
a credible expert in her local area. And so can you.
Not only can you position your entire business, but you can also
position your offer. For the following examples, I’m going to use ads
from the direct-marketing industry. Late-night infomercials that claim
to teach you how to make gobs of cash are more prolific than tech nerds
at a PC convention. This is where great positioning is really needed for
your ads to stand out.
For example, which of these two headlines attracts your attention most?
Work from Home and Turn Your E-Mail Into Big Profits!
19-Year Old College Kid Discovers Clever Way
to Persuade People to Send You Money Via PayPal.
Which did you pick? If you have the marketing and advertising
savvy I think you do, then you probably picked the one about the college guy, because it’s what I call “specifically unique.” It puts clear—
not vague—pictures in your head. And when you do this, you have a
stronger hold on your readers’ attention. They’re more engaged. They’re
wondering, “What about this 19-year old kid? How did he discover this
idea?” They probably imagine what he must look like: his face, hair,
clothing. Although there are thousands of “Make Money” ads, people
have not heard this positioning before. It’s fresh and different.
Tip: If you want your ad to stand out from the crowd, say something different.
Create ads that are different and instantly
recognizable. Research finds ‘something new
and fresh’ in the headline or picture delivers
higher ‘Read Most’ scores.
—Starch Research

142

Ad-Agency Secrets
Other examples:
Chinese Billionaire Reveals 14 Secrets That Helped Make
Him So Rich.
With Just Four Months Left to Live, Millionaire Agrees to
Reveal His Secrets of Wealth & Success.
Millionaire’s Private Diary Found in Palm Springs—
Reveals Little-Known Secrets of Success.
Get it? The point is to create a hook (or positioning) that’s different
from what thousands of other advertisers are saying. Be truthful, but
find an intriguing way to say it! Stop all the “Get Rich Online” nonsense; people are tired of this vague, generic stuff. Ask yourself, “What’s
unique about my offer? Am I the only one offering this plan, product,
or service? What’s unique about me that I can exploit?”
Are you a farmer with a great cash-generating idea to sell to others
in your industry? “Idaho Farmer Says, ‘Growing $100 Bills Is as Easy as
Growing Potatoes When You Follow My Plan!’”
Did you shave your head? “Big Bald Chris Teaches Wing Chun
Kung Fu that Might One Day Save Your Life.” Make sure you put a
picture of yourself on everything and you’ll become well known very
quickly.
Are you a big or tall man or woman? “6’5”, 275-Pound Man Offers the
BIGGEST Computer Discounts in the Nation!” Have a photo of you taken
from floor level to emphasize your size. Print it everywhere. Call yourself The Computer Giant! (In Pennsylvania, Big Marty’s Carpets has
been doing this effectively for years. Their ads and signs really stand
out...big!)
Are you a great fisherman or woman involved in network marketing? “Fishing Expert Says, “Hooking PEOPLE is as easy as hooking
flounder when you follow my secret plan to build up your down-line!”
Read the book Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind. It takes you stepby-step through the process of creating your image based on where you
are now in the market, and where you want to be.
As I shout in my seminar, “Don’t just be the generic version of what
your business is! Let your competition blend in with all the others—not
you! Give your image a twist, and stand up and stand out!”

143

CA$HVERTISING

Ad-Agency Secret #21:
Buy Your Own Island
Why pay for a full-page ad if you can dominate the page with one
that costs less? Tell your ad rep you want a Half-Page Island: In contrast
to a typical vertical or horizontal half-page, this special size is positioned so it visually takes up almost the entire page and makes it very
difficult for the newspaper to put other ads near it.
The result? They often set only reading matter (news) next to your
ad, which means less ad competition for you. The Half-Page Island is
two columns wide and three-quarters of a page deep, yet it commands
the entire page, which might—according to the principle of the LengthImplies-Strength heuristic discussed in Consumer Psychology Principle
#17—cause readers to have greater feelings of your superiority. It’s the
old “The biggest ads in the Yellow Pages must be the better, more successful companies” effect.
Remember: You don’t need giant ads for great response. Tiny little
ads—like those repeated for years, unchanged, in magazines such as
Popular Science and Popular Mechanics—have made many advertisers rich.
Because of their space limitations, however, they’re best for the ol’ twostep sales process: (1) prospects inquire, and (2) you send the full info,
which—we hope—causes them to buy. If you’re looking to do more of a
complete selling job, you’ll need more real estate to tell your story.
The Half-Page Island gives you this, while letting your story—not your
competitors’—take the spotlight.

Ad-Agency Secret #22:
Authority Positioning
Are you an authority on your topic? The Cues of Life model tells us
that authority figures have a great deal of credibility. Therefore, the claims
they make are widely believed. Using the mental shortcut of peripheral
processing, they rationalize that an authority knows what he’s talking
about. After all, he must have studied his topic for years (Length-Implies-Strength), people everywhere listen to him so it must be okay if I
do too (Bandwagon Effect), he’s impartial and relates only the facts,
not opinions (Message Sideness, Evidence), so I can rely on what he
says.

144

Ad-Agency Secrets
The fact is, you too can adopt such a position—market yourself as
an authority in your field—and wear this same coat of influence. Let’s
start with the assumption that you already have an excellent grasp on
your subject and can talk about it with fluency, because we want to
discuss how to position yourself as an authority, not how to develop the
study habits to acquire sufficient knowledge to make the claim.
Step 1: Begin to regard yourself as someone who has a mountain of
valuable information to share with others. Simple, right? Unfortunately,
low self-esteem keeps many people from taking even this first step. If
you don’t think your knowledge is valuable, you’re doomed before you
begin.
Step 2: Make what you know available to the public in as many
forms as possible. How? First, go to a local commercial photographer
and have a headshot taken of yourself wearing attire that’s appropriate
for your business. Then—and this is no time to be shy—begin printing
it on all your sales materials. From brochures to contracts, get your face
in front of the public. Put it in ads, e-mails, Web pages, sales letters,
billboards! Then do a little self-publishing. Start an e-zine. Create several three- to 10-page reports on your subject in both hardcopy and
PDF formats.
For example, let’s say you’re a printer. How about creating some
simple reports entitled:
How to Get Beautiful Wedding Invitations Printed without Getting Ripped Off
How [YOUR CITY] Businesses Can Save Up to 27% on
Beautiful 4-Color Printing
How to Make Your Resume 325% More AttentionGetting Than Your Competition
See what I mean? The report consists of information that you as a
printer already know. In the resume example, your report can simply
talk about things such as using special papers, typestyles, foils, and
inks in order to make a super-professional impression and stand out in
the crowd.
The reports would feature your headshot right on the cover, with
your name in a caption under the photo, and your business name on
the cover. For example, I’d do it this way:

145

CA$HVERTISING
INSIDE...
Printing Expert Reveals
How to Make Your Resume 325% More Effective
& Knock Out Your Competition!
A Special Report Prepared by:
Drew Eric Whitman
Business Printing Expert
Whitman Press, Inc.
821 Digital Road
Litho, CA 92261
(760) 555-5678
Inside, you begin with a few paragraphs about the importance of an
attractive resume. Then follow that up with numbered ideas:
RESUME RESPONSE BOOSTER #1: Layout & Design
Resumes are like any other business communication. But
in this case, the product you’re selling is you! So your
resume, cover letter, and envelope should be as attractive as those used by today’s biggest corporations when
they communicate with their prospective buyers. I’ve
printed the resumes for some of the most talented people
in their fields. And in every case, I’ve advised them to...
RESUME RESPONSE BOOSTER #2: Paper Selection
And so on.
What do you do with these reports? You advertise them in your ads.
You offer them free to anyone who comes into your shop. Not only do
they promote you as an authority, but they also make people comfortable with you. And while 99 percent of your competition is doing absolutely nothing to raise their image to the public, you are positioning
yourself as an authority. Remember to include a coupon with the report. If you did a good job, by the time they finish it, they should be
primed to do business with you because you’re now regarded as someone
who knows what they’re talking about on the topic of resume printing!
How else can you promote yourself as an authority? Create editorialstyle ads for your local newspaper that look like question-and-answer
columns. You make up the questions and you make up the answers.
Include about three questions with short answers in each column, and

146

Ad-Agency Secrets
make sure your headshot appears at the top with your name as the
caption. In fact, some papers will accept your “column” for free if it
offers useful information to its readers. In any event, make sure to include your business name, address, and phone number at the bottom
of the ad in this sneaky way: “Have questions about how to use printing
most effectively? Send them to: [your address here].”
Give seminars, hold workshops, create educational products, write
a book, do radio and TV interviews, blog your expertise! There’s no
limit to the number of ways you can help others, which, in turn, can
also do wonders for your business.

Ad-Agency Secret #23:
A Sales Letter in Survey’s Clothing
I’ve done this for virtually every major client with whom I’ve worked,
and it never fails to produce great returns. What you do is mail a survey
to your customers asking them five or six questions about whatever it is
you’d like information about: How they feel about your product or service, what they think about your prices, if they’ll likely buy from you in
the next month or two. In other words, ask them questions that will give
you valuable insight into their thought processes.
Then, at the bottom of the survey, make them an appealing offer
they can’t refuse. Maybe it’s a coupon for 50 percent off their next purchase, or a certificate for a free consultation, or a voucher good for a
special gift the next time they buy—whatever you think would be appealing. Next, you write a short letter saying something similar to this:
Dear Eileen:
May I ask you a favor?
I’d like to know your honest opinion of our Deluxe Auto
Detailing Service we performed for you recently.
Would you kindly check off your answers to the questions below, and then mail this survey back to me in the
postage-paid envelope enclosed? Thanks for being such
a great customer.
Sincerely,
[SIGNATURE]
Drew Eric Whitman, owner, Shimmy Shine Shop

147

CA$HVERTISING
Circle One (1) Number for Each of the Questions
Below...
1) On a scale from 1 to 10 (10 being the best), how happy
are you with our Deluxe Detailing?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Not happy

Very happy

2) On a scale from 1 to 10 (10 being the best), what do
you think about our service?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Poor
Excellent
And so on and so forth. Now, the key part is at the end of the survey,
and here’s how it looks.
Thanks, Eileen! To show my appreciation for your
completing this important survey, I’m sending you this
16-ounce bottle of Liquid Mirror Spray for 50% OFF
to protect your car’s just-detailed finish. Simply spray on
and wipe off. It’s regularly $10, but I’ll send it to you—
postage paid—for just $5 when you return this completed
survey by [DATE]. This important product helps keep your
car shining and seals out dirt for up to 50% longer when
you apply it within 30 days of your detailing, so don’t
wait! Protect your investment. Simply CHECK THE “YES”
BLOCK BELOW and return this survey with your payment. A regular $10 value, it’s my way of saying “Thank
You” for participating in my survey.
HALF-PRICE SPECIAL AVAILABLE ONLY TO SURVEY
RESPONDENTS!
[ ] YES, DREW! I have completed your survey as
you asked. Please send me a $10 can of Liquid
Mirror Spray for just 5 bucks. That’s a 50% discount available only for people who respond to
this special survey. [ ] Cash [ ] Check [ ] Money
order [ ] Credit Card: [ ] VISA [ ] Mastercard
Card#___________________ Exp._________________

148

Ad-Agency Secrets
Do you see the power of this? What it does is capitalize on the fact
that (1) people love giving their opinion on things, and (2) because
they’re already returning their survey, it’s so easy for them to slip their
payment into the postage-paid return envelope.
The key is to offer something you would have offered anyway, but
make it available only to those people who reply to your survey. The fact
that you say the low price is “your way of saying thank-you” is a great
qualifier for the low price, and gives an air of exclusivity to the offer.
The survey format is a snap. It’s simply a personal letter on an
8 1/2 × 11-inch sheet of your business stationery. Mail-merge it so your
letters look personal, and not mass produced, for best response.
You can use this survey technique for most any product or service.
On top of additional sales, you’ll also get valuable feedback. In fact, the
feedback could be worth more than the profit you earn from the additional sales! One great question to ask to get people to express themselves freely is, “If you were the owner of my business, what would you
do differently?” You’ll be amazed at some of the great answers you’ll
get. The feedback you receive could completely alter the way you run
your business. See Ad Agency Secret #28: Survey Power for more information about turning your customers’ thoughts into profits.

Ad-Agency Secret #24:
Power Your Ads With Pictures
Everyone knows the expression, “A picture is worth a thousand words,”
but most don’t know that this idiom is backed by scientific research.
In 1991, Roper Starch Worldwide conducted a study of 2,000 consumers in 10 U.S. markets who responded to 650 newspaper ads in a
large variety of retail and national categories. The results scientifically
proved how the inclusion of pictures, whether photos or illustrations,
directly impact advertising response—no matter what type of product
or service is being promoted. Here are the results of that study.
✸ Ads consisting of 50 percent visuals (photos, illustrations,
graphics elements) were noted (seen and recalled) 30
percent more often than ads with no visuals.
✸ Ads consisting of 75 percent visuals are noted 50 percent
more often than ads with few or no visuals.
✸ In the “Read Most” category, these same ads also scored
60 percent higher.

149

CA$HVERTISING
✸ Four to nine visuals boost “Noted” scores by 30 percent
over ads with fewer or no visuals.
✸ Ads with 10 or more visuals are 55 percent more likely to
be Noted than ads with fewer or no visuals.
✸ “Read Most” scores jump by 70 percent for ads with 10
or more visuals.
✸ Showing the product attracts readers 13 percent more
often than showing no product.
✸ Photos are the most compelling type of graphics and
attract the greatest readership.

The Seven Best Types of Photos
Multiple studies show that the following types of photos attract the
most attention. In a classic survey performed for the Kimberly-Clark
Corporation by the Gallup Research Bureau, called “Let 4,979,855 readers tell you what they read on Sunday,” 29,000 readers of 20 different
Sunday newspapers in 16 cities were questioned. Gallup found that
readers preferred the following pictures, listed in order of preference:
1. Children and babies.
2. Mothers and babies.
3. Groups of adults.
4. Animals.
5. Sports scenes.
6. Celebrities.
7. Food.
Parade magazine once reported that the following pictures get the
greatest attention:
1. Babies.
2. Mothers and babies.
3. Animals.
4. Personalities.
5. Food pictures.
Why are these pictures so appealing to us? Because they tap into
our Life-Force 8 desires. We want love, to protect and care for our family, social acceptance, the drive to win, status, and food and drink. In
Douglas Adams’s The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, the meaning of life

150

Ad-Agency Secrets
is “42.” In reality, the answer to most any “why” question you can ask
about human beings is “8”—the Life-Force 8. Try it and see.
Pictures are only effective in influencing
brand choice if there is a clear connection
with the brand and message.
—Giep Franzen, Advertising Effectiveness, 1994

The Power of Demonstration,
Action, and Pseudo-Movement
Placing a photo of your product in your ad attracts readers 13 percent more often than not showing it. Product-in-use shots add an additional 13 percent boost over product-only shots. Why? In-use photos
add action, drama, interest, and demonstrate your product or service
and engage readers’ imaginations. Ads with photos or illustrations of
people increase “noted” scores by nearly 25 percent over ads without
any people or visuals.
In my CA$HVERTISING seminar I show examples of two ads for
pepper spray for two competing companies. Company A’s headline
reads, “MUGGER STOPPER!” and features a close-up of a woman’s
hand holding the product as if she were showing you the label. Yawn. I
can’t think of another product that offers so much dramatic possibility,
yet this company opted to show their product doing...er, nothing at all.
Company B, on the other hand, was smart. Their headline, “Stop
Muggers at the Push of a Button!” showed an illustration of a woman
spraying a group of sleazy-looking attackers who surround her in a semicircle. Each of the thugs is shown in various stages of distress: on their
knees, flat on the ground, coughing, grabbing their faces, screaming,
and running away.
Now tell me, dear reader, if you saw only the headlines and the pictures, which of these two products would you prefer to carry if you were
in the market for pepper spray? The answer is obvious. Company B
gave you a demonstration—so to speak—of how its product works. And
even though it’s an illustration—black-and-white at that—(a photo would
have been better), it still conveys a sense of the pepper spray’s effectiveness, whereas Company A’s crappy ad conveys nothing more than a
sense of advertising ignorance.

151

CA$HVERTISING
Always provide context for your photos. Instead of
showing a refrigerator against a generic studio
background, show it in a beautifully equipped
working kitchen.
—Starch Research

Ad-Agency Secret #25: Grab ’Em With Grabbers
What are grabbers? They’re little items you attach to the top of the
first page of your sales letter that grab people’s eyes and make it nearly
impossible for them not to read further, such as a penny, nickel, dime,
quarter, or dollar bill.
If I sent you a letter with a $1 bill stapled to the top, wouldn’t you be
interested? It’s just a dollar, but that letter would probably interest you
more than anything else that arrived in the mail that day. Here’s an
example of how you can begin your copy using this technique. Let’s
say, for example, that I sell carpet and I got my hands on a list of people
who just moved into the neighborhood.
Dear Scott,
As you can see, I have attached a crisp one-dollar bill to
the top of this letter.
Why? To make a point.
I’m going to show you—right here in this letter—how to
save 100 of these bills (yes, $100.00) when you buy carpet for your new home.
Or let’s say I own a day spa and I mail to a list women within 5 miles
of my business.
Dear Louise,
As you can see, I have attached a crisp one-dollar bill to
the top of this letter.
Why? To make a point.
I’m going to show you—right here in this letter—how to
save 20 of these bills (yes, $20.00) on your very first visit
to Caribbean Blue.

152

Ad-Agency Secrets
Or let’s say I’m a network marketer selling tropical mangosteen juice,
and I mail the following to a list of opportunity seekers.
Dear Eric,
As you can see, I have attached a crisp one-dollar bill to
the top of this letter.
Why? To make a point.
I’m going to show you—right here in this letter—how to
make up to 10,000 of these bills (yes, $10,000.00) in
less than three months, with the hottest new moneymaking
program to hit the network marketing industry in decades!
Get it? It’s a proven effective way to stir up your readers’ curiosity—
and maybe even make them feel a little obligated to at least read your
letter. But there are many more grabbers than the lowly dollar. All kinds
of things make interesting and effective eye-catchers.
For example, let’s say I’m a crafty wedding photographer and I’m
able to get a hold of a mailing list of women about to get married.
Dear Louise,
As you can see, I have attached a HORRIBLE wedding
photo to the top of this letter.
Why have I done this? To keep YOU from making the same
tragic mistake this poor couple did.
You see, Esther and Sam (the bride and groom) had no
idea what to look for when they chose their wedding
photographer.
The result? A crying shame! The lighting was crummy. The
people look stiff. The angles are amateurish. The color is
inconsistent. And even their skin-tone is blotchy. Their one
big day and all they have to show for it is a bunch of
mediocre photos.
Do YOU know how to avoid the mistake Esther and Sam
made? I’ll tell you how, right here in this letter.
You’d continue your letter with some helpful tips and then describe
the advantage of your services. Include a sheet of testimonials (featuring your best photos, of course), and extend your money-saving offer. A
good-looking “savings certificate” would add a nice touch.

153

CA$HVERTISING
✸ Do you sell Laguna Beach, California, real estate? Attach
a little baggy of sand!
✸ Are you a collection agency? Attach an “NSF” check!
✸ A candy shop? Attach a wrapper from a bar of your finest
chocolate and enclose a coupon good for a free sample of
what was once inside that wrapper! (What a nasty trick!)
✸ A printer? Attach a poorly printed brochure.
The possibilities are endless! Just be sure that your grabber won’t
rip the envelope, or postal workers will see a slew of some very bizarre
objects floating around in the mail stream! If you choose to use a bubble
wrap–lined envelope, your options are even greater.
The technique works. It worked for Robert Collier way back in 1937,
and it will work for you today. Skeptical? Test it! Do an A-B Split: A)
Mail 500 sales letters with the grabber, and B) mail another 500 letters
without the grabber. Compare the results, and I’ll welcome you as the
newest member of the Great Grabber Fan Club!

Ad-Agency Secret #26:
Long Copy vs. Short
Ah yes, the old long copy vs. short debate. I thought the argument
was buried decades ago. Not just rotting dead, but bone-dry dust dead.
The fact is, real-world (not academic) testing for nearly a century shows
there’s nothing left to debate. But some less informed people disagree.
Direct response advertisers know that short copy
doesn’t sell. In split run tests, long copy invariably
outsells short copy.
—David Ogilvy
In fact, the one comment that immediately tells me someone knows
very little about advertising goes this way: “Oh, you better keep the
copy short! No one reads long copy. People are busier than ever these
days. Keep it nice and short.”
Although their warnings to keep it short might sound logical, it’s
utter nonsense! Direct response copy great Gary Halbert, an early mentor of mine, once wrote, “Copy can never be too long, only too boring!”
How true.

154

Ad-Agency Secrets
Hundreds of studies and thousands of experiments have been done.
And all the giants of advertising, John Caples, Claude Hopkins, David
Ogilvy, John E. Kennedy, Eugene Schwartz, Maxwell Sackheim, Walter
Weir, and all the other Copywriter Hall of Famers agree: Well-written
long copy outsells short copy. No qualifications. No disclaimers. It simply
does.
The most common expression you hear about
advertising is that people will not read much.
Yet a vast amount of the best-paying advertising
shows that people do read much.
—Claude Hopkins
The fact is, if someone is a true prospect for your product, you
wouldn’t believe how much well-written sales copy he or she will read.
Don’t ramble with your copy, of course. Don’t write simply to fill up
space or to impress people with your vocabulary. But do write enough
to inform, build desire, convince, and motivate people to take action.
The old expression, “the more you tell, the more you sell” is true...if you
tell it right.
Think about it: Would you be more likely to buy if you spent two
hours with a good salesperson, or just 10 minutes? Two hours of course.
Why, you’d hear every sales pitch in his repertoire, he’d hit you with
every benefit he could conjure, he’d uncover—and then push—every
one of your hot buttons, over and over again.
The only reason for using short copy is when
there isn’t much to say.
—Maxwell Sackheim
So why would people think their sales materials are so different than
this salesperson? Of course, your ads, brochures, and sales letters can’t
judge feedback. They can’t see what’s turning the prospect on or off.
That’s why they have to cover all the bases. Restate each benefit from
several different angles, and from several different perspectives.
Did you ever notice how many car commercials, for example, not
only appeal to what you’re going to think about your new car, but also

155

CA$HVERTISING
what others think about it? Heads turn as the car whizzes by (Life-Force
8: social approval; keeping up with the Joneses). And practicality: it’s
so darned safe. Crash tests prove it. (Life-Force 8: survival; freedom
from pain and danger; protection of loved ones). Notice how they appeal to not only your emotions, but also to logic and reason? This way
they speak to both the peripheral and central-route thinkers.
But that’s not all! The low price and high gas mileage ratings mean
you’re buying smart. You’re responsible. (Life-Force 8: social approval.)
And you can save money for the more important things in life, such as
your kid’s education, or a nice vacation with your spouse.
See what’s happening? The more ways you justify the purchase of
your product, the more likely you’ll influence people to buy. So you take
them by the hand and tell the whole story. You pile on the benefits
(Length-Implies-Strength), show pictures to help them see it, slather
on the testimonials (social proof), and back it up with a warranty (to
quell fear). By the time you’re done, you have quite a convincing (and
often lengthy) sales piece. Keep it interesting and relevant. The more
sell they’re exposed to, the stronger the influence.
A salesman does not say, “How do you do?” speak
a few words about his product, then ask you to
sign the order. No, he uses enough words to get
your emotions and reasoning power flowing
toward a sale.
—Victor Schwab
Here’s why I think most people don’t get it: They think that people
must read all the copy in order to buy. Nonsense! If I’m reading a longcopy ad or sales letter, for example, and I’m ready to buy after reading
just the headline, I’ll pick up the phone and place my order right then
and there. I’m not going to say, “Shoot! I really wanted this thing, but
there’s more copy to read. Oh hell...now I can’t order.” That’s ridiculous!
Some people need long copy to be convinced; others can decide with
less information. Long copy satisfies both parties. Ms. Long gets all
her details. Mr. Short can stop reading whenever he wants to and place
his order. On the other hand, if I used only short copy, I don’t give
Ms. Long what she needs, and she goes away unconvinced. How silly to
create sales materials for only one type of buyer.

156

Ad-Agency Secrets
“But Drew, what about Web copy? That’s totally different, right?”
Wrong. Studies show that long copy outperforms short copy...yes, even
online.
User Interface Engineering is a research, training, and consulting firm
specializing in Website and product usability. Here’s what they report.
1. “Our research shows that fewer, longer pages may be the
best approach for users. In the trade-off between hiding
content below the fold or spreading it across several
pages, users have greater success when the content is on
a single page.”
2. “Increasing the levels of information, similar to adding
sections to an outline, also seemed to help users.”
3. “Users may tell us they hate scrolling, but their actions
show something else. Most users readily scrolled through
pages, usually without comment.”
MarketingExperiments.com conducted several tests to see what
impact copy length has on a Website’s conversion rate.
Results: Long copy outperformed short copy in all three of their
tests.
Despite internal debating about whether or not to try a long-copy
approach, Online-Learning.com quadrupled the length of the copy on
their homepage. Doug Talbott reported, “The number of people who
left our site after viewing only the homepage has dropped by about 5
percent...we’ve also noticed that our enrollments have increased by about
20 percent.”
If advertisers worried more about the quality of their sales materials,
they wouldn’t have time to worry about this ridiculous chicken-and-egg
riddle. They’d be too busy ringing up sales.
After you have found your most efficient-size ad, you
should jam your space full of copy, no matter whether it
is a one-inch ad or a full-page ad.
—John Caples
Anyone debating me on this point is ridiculous. Anyone debating
John Caples and the other advertising greats I’ve quoted in this section
is an advertising knucklehead.

157

CA$HVERTISING

Ad-Agency Secret #27: Offer Testing
Just as you should test different headlines, it’s vitally important to
test different offers. Just because people don’t respond to your ad, that
does not mean they don’t want what you’re selling. Your ad may not
have communicated effectively, or simply wasn’t sufficiently appealing.
For example, let’s say you’re Dr. McCracken, chiropractor, and your
current ad announces your grand opening. The ad seems great, but no
one calls. So you rewrite your ad and you offer a free spinal evaluation.
Or you offer 50 percent off their first visit. What you have done is change
your offer. In fact, your Grand Opening wasn’t offering anybody anything at all, was it? You were just telling people to be happy because
you’re in business. No good. You need to develop different offers and
find out which works best.
How else could you frame your offer? How about instead of 50
percent off the first visit, you say, “2 Visits for the Price of 1!” It’s the
same thing as 50 percent off, isn’t it? But testing has shown that “Buy
One Get One FREE” is more effective than saying 50 percent off. Free is
a powerful word.
What else could you say? How about “April Special: FREE Spinal
Exams for Runners,” then try, “May Special: FREE Spinal Exams for
Body Builders,” and so on. Why not try, “FREE Massage with Every
Visit!” What could such an appealing offer do for your customer base?
I don’t care if you hire a massage school student to do the work, you’d be
offering more than Dr. Vertebrae down the road, and giving people what
they’re looking for: more! Giving a free massage lets you make a very
appealing offer in your ad, and can help you divert attention away from
your competition that offers nothing extra.
Constantly ask yourself, “How can I give my customers more, knowing that they’ll reward me with more business?” Isn’t this what you want
when you shop? Don’t you want more for your money? Of course. What
other offers can you make? How about a “Family Special?” Or a “Husband and Wife” deal? These are all different offers, different ways to
position the deal. Keep testing different offers until you find one that
delivers results that knock your socks off.
How about a special rate for seniors? How about every fifth visit is
free? If you’re a chiropractor who adjusts children’s spines, how about,
“Free Sammy the Smiling Skeleton With Every Child’s Visit!” and put a
picture of it in your ad. Sure, it’s creepy, but who knows? It might

158

Ad-Agency Secrets
bomb...or it might take your practice in a whole new profitable direction! That’s precisely why you test. How about a free back support pad
with every first visit? Or an authoritative-sounding report, “14 Things
You’re Doing Right Now That Are Torturing Your Back and Spine.”
If your ads aren’t working, don’t throw in the towel and say “Nobody wants what I’m selling! Woe is me!” First try changing your headline, because this will make or break your ad in the first few seconds.
Then check your price, because you could simply be out of line with
the market. Then try a different offer.
Remember: What you’re trying to do is find out what appeals to
the marketplace. You can’t tell the marketplace what to buy from you.
They will tell you what they want. If your ad doesn’t work, they are telling
you. If your phone doesn’t ring, they are telling you. If no one redeems
your coupons, they are telling you. It’s up to you to find out what they
want and then give it to them. And that’s the subject of...

Ad-Agency Secret #28: Survey Power
What’s the best way to find out what people want? Ask them. That’s
exactly what salespeople started doing back in the 1930s. They approached cab drivers, homemakers, businessmen, construction workers, retailers—whoever fit the description of the target market they were
after—and fired the questions at them: “What do you like? What do
you dislike? What do you want? What would you prefer? How could it
be better?”
The responses gave manufacturers invaluable feedback for new and
improved products. It also gave their ad agencies ammunition to create
campaigns that zeroed in on consumers’ desires with the accuracy of a
cruise missile, versus the fall-where-they-will gravity bomb campaigns
they used before taking surveys.
It’s no different today. And despite how it’s portrayed on TV and in
movies, working in an agency is not what most people think it is. You
don’t just sit around and dream up clever slogans. The process of developing a successful advertising campaign and accompanying materials does not begin with creative flashes. It begins with research.
For example, if you have the greatest bottled water in the world and
you’re trying to peddle it door-to-door in a city where the majority of
residents have their own backyard wells, you’re out of luck. You didn’t
do your research.

159

CA$HVERTISING
Instead of spending thousands of dollars running ads trying to guess
what your customers or prospects want, why not simply ask them, and
then create advertising around their responses! A clever shortcut, no?
So do a survey! Ask people what they think about your product or
service. For example, if you run a pizzeria, ask people what things are
most important to them when going out for pizza. What do they like?
What do they hate? What’s the most they’d pay for an 18-inch pie with
the works? Would they come in more often if you offered two free drinks
with every large pizza? What’s their biggest complaint? How often do
they go out for—or pick up—pizza?
To whom do you send this survey? How about everybody within a
5-mile radius of your pizzeria? Or maybe just your own customers. Offer a free slice as a thank-you for providing their feedback. Yep...bribe
them to take your survey. And don’t you dare gripe about this! The
amount you spend on free slices is insignificant compared to the value of
the information you’ll receive. Limit the response time to keep it under
control.
A good format for a survey is a double postcard. This is simply a
postcard that’s split with a perforation. One of the postcards has the
address of the recipient on it. The opposite side explains the free goodies they get for completing and returning the survey card, which is the
other side of the perforation. On the opposite side of the survey card is
your return address. After completing the survey, your recipient simply
tears on the perforation, separating both cards, and drops the survey
card in the mail. For greater response, use a Business Reply Mail permit
indicia on the reply card so people aren’t put off by having to stamp it.
Hey, you’re getting valuable information, so make it as easy as possible
for people to complete your survey!
Another simple format is a one-page letter-size survey. You’d mail
your one-page letter explaining your great offer and enclose the onepage survey along with a postage-paid reply envelope addressed to your
company. They’ll read your letter, complete the survey, slip it into your
self-addressed, stamped envelope, and pop it in the mail. Try to keep it
short, and you may be able to get both your letter and survey on the
front of one 8 1/2 × 11-inch page, on both sides if necessary. This will
save paper and make the whole process less complicated to your recipient because there will be fewer papers to handle. The advantage of this
format is that it’s much easier to print yourself, and the letter and envelope format look more like a personal communication, which is likely to

160

Ad-Agency Secrets
get greater attention. (Be sure to read Ad Agency Secret #14: The
“Granny Rule” of Direct Mail for design tips for getting people to open
your survey letter.)
Remember: The secret of good survey response is ease! Make it
super easy to reply. Give all multiple-choice answers if possible, and use
semantic differential scales. For example:
On a scale from 1 to 10, how likely are you to go out for
pizza rather than make it yourself at home?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Not Likely to Go Out

Very Likely to Go Out

On a scale from 1 to 10, how much better is Franko’s pizza
compared to store-bought frozen pizzas?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Franko’s Is Worse

Franko’s Is Better

On a scale from 1 to 10, how likely are you to return to
Franko’s Pizza within the next two weeks?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Not Likely
Very Likely
Wouldn’t it be a shame if, after spending thousands on a new promotion, hundreds on ads, and hundreds on your new brochure, you
find out that what you’re pushing isn’t what your customers and prospects want? Ugh. You need to do your research first. And doing a survey
is the easiest and most inexpensive way to do it.
Imagine the advantages you’ll have over your competition, knowing exactly how your prospects feel, what they want, when they plan on
returning, and even how much they’d pay! Now imagine how foolish
you’ll feel after tallying up all the responses and thinking about all those
ridiculous promotions you ran offering the complete opposite of what
they really wanted. I’m confident that few—if any—of your competitors
have ever done it. Ad agencies respect the power of the survey and the
incredible insight it provides. Try it once, and I guarantee you’ll make it
part of your standard practice.

161

CA$HVERTISING

Ad-Agency Secret #29: Editorial Energizers
You don’t need to be related to Walter Cronkite to benefit from making your ads look like news stories. It’s a tested and proven effective way
to lift your response, and it’s so easy to do. This incredibly simple idea
is hailed by many of the best-known advertising professionals of all time.
David Ogilvy said editorial ads get 50 percent better readership.
John Caples said 80 percent. Direct response specialist Richard Benson
quotes 500 to 600 percent. Eugene Schwartz, one of the greatest direct
response copywriters of all time, dedicates an entire section to this technique in his book Breakthrough Advertising. Schwartz calls the technique
camouflage because the goal is to make your ad blend in with the
publication’s news stories. Here’s how it works.
Let’s say you’re a professional hypnotist who specializes in helping
people quit smoking. Instead of creating an ad that looks the same as
every other ad in your local paper, you write your ad in news-article
style. You have it set in the same typeface, the same column width, and
the same leading (pronounced “ledding,” and meaning the space between each of your lines) as that publication’s news articles are set. Do
the same for your headline too. Your “news ad” could start out something similar to this:
Local Hypnotist Announces New Way
to Quit Smoking in 48 Hours
If you’re an Orlando resident who wants to kick the habit,
but you can’t seem to muster the willpower, then this
article brings you good news. Master Hypnotist and
Orlando resident Burgess J. Halshire has discovered a
new way to....
It’s as simple as that. You just continue in that same manner, giving
the same benefits as you would in a regular ad, but you couch them in
the “news reporter voice.”
A great technique is to work in a few quotes, such as, “I thought I’d
never quit,” said Scott Lawrence, one of Halshire’s successful patients.
“I tried absolutely everything, including locking myself in a mop closet
for a week. It didn’t work, and now I prefer smoking in mop closets.”
After you’ve told your story, you push for action. “For more information about Halshire’s powerful new 48-Hour Stop Smoking Technique, simply call his office at (407) 345-6789. Or visit him online at
HalshireHypnosis.com”

162

Ad-Agency Secrets
CA$HVERTISING Tip: In editorial ads, never sound too enthusiastic about what you’re selling. News reporting is supposed to be objective, so if you get too carried away, too “hypey,” you’ll blow the whole
effect. It’s a good idea to first read a few news stories from the publication before you sit down to write your ad. This will give you a feel for
the tone you need to duplicate. For increased response, offer a free
report to anyone who calls or visits your Website: “For a free copy of
Dr. Halshire’s report, ‘How Hypnosis Can Help You Quit Smoking in
48 Hours,’ simply call his office at (407) 345-6789. Or visit him online
at HalshireHypnosis.com.”
It has been found that the less an
advertisement looks like an advertisement,
and the more it looks like an editorial, the
more readers stop, look, and read.
—David Ogilvy

Ad-Agency Secret #30:
The Coupon Persuader
Can a simple broken, coupon-style line around your ad help motivate people to buy? Yes indeed. Even if your ad is not an actual “moneyoff ” coupon, this technique often lifts response because people are
conditioned to read and act on coupons thanks to the financial rewards
they suggest.
Who discovered this little moneymaker? All hail Mr. Asa Griggs Candler,
the Philadelphia pharmacist who bought the Coca-Cola company from
the soft drink’s inventor, Dr. John Pemberton. Candler was considered
a pioneer in coupon promotions. In 1894, Candler offered a refreshing
glass of Coca-Cola free to anyone who redeemed one of his little handwritten tickets. This was so successful, he next offered two gallons of
Coca-Cola syrup “to any retailer or soda fountain man” who would dispense 128 free servings (one gallon’s worth) of the beverage to customers who presented one of his coupon cards. Candler’s aggressive
promotions drove Coca-Cola into every state and territory in the United
States by 1895.
Don’t ignore coupons, no matter what kind of business you’re in. Little
coupons bring big returns! Check these stats from the Coupon Council:

163

CA$HVERTISING
✸ 86 percent of the population of the United States uses
coupons.
✸ Shoppers saved approximately $2.7 billion last year by
using coupons.
✸ The typical coupon was worth $1.28 savings in 2007.
✸ Coupon users report an average of 11.5 percent savings
on their grocery bill with coupons.
✸ Manufacturers offered more than $350 billion in coupon
savings in 2007.
“Yeah, that sounds great, Drew, but only older people clip coupons;
retired people will lots of time on their hands. My market is different.”
Not true! Everybody—young and old—loves saving money. Check out
these stats.
Age

Percent Using Coupons

18–24

71

25–34

87

35–44

89

45–54

85

55–64

90

65+

91

“But Drew, only low-income people clip coupons!” Wrong again! In
fact, the greatest percentage of coupon users earn up to $100,000 a
year!

164

Ad-Agency Secrets
Income

Percent Using Coupons

Under $25,000

86

$25–$50,000

85

$50–$75,000

88

$75–$100,000

88

$100,000+

81

[Coupon stats courtesy of CMS, Inc., PMA Coupon Council]
The bottom line? People are coupon crazy! In fact, many will clip a
coupon that saves them 50 cents and drive five miles out of their way
just to redeem the damned thing. At today’s standard car-mileage reimbursement of 58.5 cents, you don’t need to be Einstein to see that this
person is $5.35 in the hole.
But that’s not all. Advertise “Double Coupons!” and some people drool
with anticipation until the next Sunday’s newspaper smacks on their
doorstep. Well, you too can harness the psychological power of coupons. Simply surround your ad, order form, flyer, or reply coupon with
a bold, broken, block-type border. I just wrote copy for a free bonus gift
that my client will feature on his Website. I instructed the designer to
set the copy within a coupon border of 3-point thickness with a very
light yellow tint behind the text. What an eye-catcher!
When you use this idea, you’re taking advantage of what’s called an
anchor in neuro-linguistic programming (NLP). An anchor is a conditioned
response that’s set off by the introduction of a particular stimulus. Russian scientist Ivan Pavlov rang the bell and fed the dog, rang the bell
and fed the dog, rang the bell and fed the dog. Soon, after all these repetitions, he was able to make the dog drool by simply ringing the bell. The
bell was the anchor. A link between the bell and the food was made in
the dog’s brain, and a “conditioned reflex”—copious drooling—resulted.
To the dog, the bell actually meant food. Pavlov termed the response
signalization, which later came to be known as classical conditioning.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: A coupon doesn’t have to be a certain size
to be effective. It can be anything from a tiny one-inch column ad (look

165

CA$HVERTISING
in Popular Science for examples of some powerful little one-inch “coupon” ads) to a giant brochure. I like to use bold coupon borders where
each “dot” that makes up the border is actually a little rectangle.
So, can you now see how a coupon acts as an anchor? In the human
mind, a coupon means savings, it means a good buy, it means a smart
shopper. And while it’s not likely that you’ll get anyone to drool over
your coupon (if you do, please let me know; that’s one technique I’m
still trying to develop), you can take advantage of the positive feelings—
either conscious or unconscious—that coupons stimulate; feelings that
often lead to sales.

Ad-Agency Secret #31:
7 Online Response Boosters
1. Best Frequency for E-Mailing
How often should you e-mail for the best response? Forrester
Research and NFO World Group both reported the identical conclusion that 31 to 35 percent of e-mail recipients prefer one mailing per
week; 18 percent said two to three days per week; 13 percent said once
a month; 12 percent said daily; 10 percent responded two to three times
per month; 6 percent said less than once a month; and the NFO study
reported that 8 percent replied “Never.”

2. Click-Through Rates—
Studies Tell What to Expect
Gas prices go up, e-mail response goes down. There’s no correlation, but it’s a reality we all must face. Studies show that click-through
rates for e-mail marketing are declining. Currently you can expect anything from less than 1 percent in response to poorly crafted offers e-mailed
to rented lists, to more than 20 percent for offers containing highly
appealing incentives sent to your own customer list.
Remember: Click-throughs do not mean orders, but to make the
sale your audience must, of course, first read your message.

3. The HTML vs. Text Conundrum
According to Opt-In News, more than 68 percent of all e-mail marketing is in HTML (hypertext markup language) format—or, more simply, e-mail enhanced with graphics. Today, approximately 60 percent of

166

Ad-Agency Secrets
e-mail users have the ability to receive these more visual e-mails. According to Jupiter Research, HTML gets a 200 percent better response
than plain text. The catch-22: Some people choose to block HTMLformatted e-mails.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Do an A-B Split. Compare the response
you get from HTML versus text-only promo. Chop your list in half and
mail each version at the same time. The increased response power of a
well-constructed HTML e-mail may out-pull a text-only e-mail with
higher deliverability.

4. Best Way to Get Your E-Mails Opened
According to Opt-In News, 69 percent is the average “open rate” for
opt-in, business-to-business ezines; 60 percent or higher is considered
excellent. What affects your “open rate” most?
1. Familiar sender (use your name if they’ll recognize it).
2. Personal subject line (always include your recipient’s
name).
3. Offer of interest (precision-target your market).

5. Ad Size and Readership
As is the case with print advertising, in online advertising, “skyscrapers” (vertically tall ads) and “leaderboards” (large banners) are more
effective than regular-sized banners. In addition, large ads are more
effective than small, and interactive (DHTML) ads are more effective
than non-interactive. These findings resulted from a study performed
for C-NET, and they confirm that human beings do not act dramatically different online or off, as print advertising research shows similar
patterns of response. So much for today’s techies who keep parroting
the inaccurate line, “The rules for online advertising are different!” As
with all other forms of advertising, an online banner ad will either do
well or poorly depending how well it adheres to the foundational, immutable principles of advertising, such as those featured in this book.

6. Animation Click-Through Booster
Animated ads generate click-through rates at least 15 percent higher
than static, motionless ads, and in some cases as much as 40 percent
higher. Why? Movement catches attention. It’s part of a survival mechanism that alerts us to oncoming danger. But does this mean your ads

167

CA$HVERTISING
should be littered with movement for the sake of movement? No. Test
simple moving elements that enhance your sales message.
Caution: Rapidly flashing elements are annoying. The goal is to
attract, not irritate. Consider transitions, wipes, fades, and other similar
actions.

7. Mystery Ads Score High Click-Throughs
...but low conversion to sales. Cryptic online ads and e-mails can
increase click-through by 18 percent, says one study. The problem? Lots
of clicks, few sales. Why? Poor targeting. Send your mortgage solicitation to names in the phone book. Write on the envelope in big letters:
“SEX!” Most people will open the envelope. Even those who don’t need
a mortgage. But you can’t blame them, can you? Sex and survival are
the Life-Force 8 granddaddies of them all. The problem is, “SEX!” made
them open the envelope, not your wonderful low-interest adjustable. So
next time try: “Need a Low-Interest Mortgage?” You’re then using the
right words on the right audience. Fewer will open your e-mail, but
those who do will be better prospects.
Remember: Don’t confuse clicks for sales.

Ad-Agency Secret #32:
Multi-page Your Way to Success
Ad agency media buyers understand the importance of repetition.
They know that every time their commercial runs, they likely have only
a fraction of your attention. So they run it repeatedly in hopes of making their point. If it didn’t affect you the first 10 times you saw it, they
hope the next 50 showings will compel you to buy.
The same strategy applies to print advertising. You can’t just place
one ad once and be done with it. Just the same as that TV commercial,
your first ad might not catch your prospects’ attention. Only a certain
percentage will read any individual insertion. That’s the importance of
frequency. Extensive testing by Starch Research has shown that placing
more than one ad in the same issue of the same publication can be
remarkably effective, and have a 1 + 1 = 3 effect that no single ad can
replicate. If you want to make some waves in your market, here are 10
ways to do it.

168

Ad-Agency Secrets

The 10 Most Effective Multi-ad Formations
1. Three single-page ads in sequence on the right side.
2. Two-single page ads in different sections of the same
issue on the right side.
3. Double-page spread.
4. Single-page ads on the right.
5. Single-page ads on the left with strip ad on the right.
6. Single-page ads on the left.
7. Right-page checkerboard (one quarter-page ad in each of
the page’s four corners).
8. Left-page checkerboard ads.
9. Half-page ad, upper right.
10. Half-page ad, lower right.

Ad-Agency Secret #33: Guarantees That
Guarantee Higher Response
Do you believe in your product or service? How strongly? I offer a
full one-year money-back guarantee on many of my products. Why? It
instills confidence in buyers and puts them at ease. They think, “Drew
must feel pretty confident about this product. I have a full year to return it and get all my money back. How can I lose?”
Buyers feel vulnerable. In exchange for their hard-earned money,
they take a leap of faith every time they give some of it away. They wonder if what they’re buying will be worth at least the value of the money
they’ve exchanged for it. And between the time they release their legal
tender and the time they experience the product, there’s a period of
stress and uncertainty. The higher the dollar amount of the transaction, of course, the greater the stress. Buy a rotten apple, and it won’t
ruin your day. But buy a house and find out five years later that the title
was forged and you never really owned it, and say hello to an “Excedrin
headache” that’ll span six seasons.
During the Great Depression, people were extremely cautious about
spending what little money they had. Counter to the logic of the times,
Hormel ran a large ad in a Chicago newspaper featuring an illustration
of an apron-clad grocer holding a can of soup in his outstretched hand.
Here’s how it began:

169

CA$HVERTISING
DOUBLE YOUR MONEY BACK
...if you don’t say this NEW Home-Style Vegetable Soup
is the most delicious you ever bought.
THE OFFER Friday and Saturday only. Go to your nearest food store. Pay the regular price of 13¢ for one big
20 oz. container of Hormel Flavor-Sealed Vegetable
Soup, following instructions on the label. If you don’t
agree that it’s the best vegetable soup you ever bought,
return the empty container to your grocer...who is authorized to pay you back TWICE what you paid.
It was the first time an advertiser had the courage to offer a “doubleyour-money-back” guarantee. Many fearful company execs warned,
“Don’t do it! With the state of the economy, people are going to buy
armloads of soup and return them all for a big profit!”
The ad was a smashing success, and only 12 women took advantage
of the guarantee. But the question is: Did the guarantee help close the
sale? You better believe it did. It reduced buyers’ pre-purchase stress.
And most importantly, it gave them the confidence to buy.
Every time your prospect thinks about buying, her head becomes a
battleground for two opposing forces: skepticism and the desire to believe.
Now, imagine an old apothecary scale with skepticism on one side and
the desire to believe on the other. Let’s say her level of skepticism is a 7 on
a scale from 1 to 10, 10 being “most skeptical.” And her desire to believe
is a 5. It’s up to you to throw more weight onto the desire to believe side in
order to offset the amount of skepticism she now experiences. Including a strong guarantee helps lighten the skepticism side and press down
on that desire side. Sometimes it’s all you need to clinch the sale.
Not only do longer, stronger guarantees boost your sales, but they
(ironically) also result in fewer returns. Why? Studies show that shortterm guarantees (30, 60, or 90 days) keep customers poised to make the
return and force them to be more conscious of the return deadline.
Longer guarantees (six months, one, five, 10 years, lifetime) give prospects confidence in the product and avoid the “beat the clock” mindset
of using the product and sending it back within the short allotted time.
CA$HVERTISING Tip: Offer the longest, strongest guarantee in
your industry. (Your competition will hate you for this.) Such a guarantee conveys your confidence in what you sell, which in turn gives prospects the confidence to give you their money. As a bonus, it causes

170

Ad-Agency Secrets
potential buyers to question your competitors’ weak—or absent!—guarantee. It also lets you ask—in big bold type—“Why Do Our Competitors Guarantee their [PRODUCT TYPE] for Only 90 Days?” Followed
up with the insidious, “Do they know something about their [PRODUCT] that they’re not telling you?”
A well-crafted guarantee isn’t an afterthought. It’s a damned powerful sales tool—one of your most important, especially if your competitors’ guarantee is weak by comparison. Show off your guarantee,
don’t hide it! Surround it with a fancy certificate border and print your
signature under it. Include it in your ads, on brochures, your Website,
everywhere. Be proud of it! And watch it perform wonders for you.

Ad-Agency Secret #34:
The Psychology of Size
Fact: Bigger ads attract more attention. This idea has been tested by
various researchers using different methodologies, and they’ve all come
to this same conclusion. What hasn’t been quantified, however, is just
how much of a proportional increase in attention a larger ad will consistently deliver. Research has shown this: the attention value of ads is not in
direct proportion to its increased size. In other words, increasing the size of
your ad four times will not, in general, multiply the number of readers
by four.
So if your boss, client, partner, or spouse says, “Hey, we got 100
replies to our quarter-page ad. Blow it up to a full-page ad so we’ll get
400 replies,” you need to sit him or her down and have a little talk.
In the following table, the attention value of a quarter-page ad is
represented as 100 percent. Likewise, the attention value of both the
half- and full-page ads are calculated as a ratio to the value of the
quarter-page ad.
Okay, let’s make this easy. In applied psychologist Walter Dill Scott’s
experiment (first column, bold type), he had subjects read magazines at
their own pace and later asked, “What ads do you remember?” Note
that the half-page ad (which was two times the area of the quarter-page)
scored 300 percent, or three times the attention. The full-page ad (which
was four times the area of the quarter page) scored 666 percent, or more
than six times the attention. Scott’s conclusion: Attention value exceeds
increase of ad size. This would mean you could double your ad size and
get far more than double the attention. Great, right? But wait...

171

CA$HVERTISING
Ratio of Size
to Attention

Quarter-Page
Control Ad

Half Page
(2x size)

Full Page
(4x size)

W.D. Scott

100%

300%

666%

E.K. Strong

100%

141%

215%

G.B. Hotchkiss

100%

151%

213%

D. Starch

100%

168%

314%

H.F. Adams

100%

178%

No Data

Averages

100%

187.6%

352%

Stanford University researcher E.K. Strong (creator of The Strong
Interest Inventory, used today to help people make career choices) believed that using real magazines would skew the test results. “Hey guys,
it’s not just ad size that’s influencing your subjects...it’s the ads themselves!” So Strong created a dummy magazine—a mock-up—for his experiment. The results showed that the attention value for the larger ads
did not increase as dramatically as in Scott’s experiment. Strong’s
Conclusion: Attention value lags behind increase of ad size.
New York University Professor G.B. Hotchkiss’s study had similar
results. Without mentioning anything about the ads themselves, he instructed students in his class to read an article in a magazine, and later
asked them to recall what ads they saw.
How about our buddy Daniel Starch? In his classic Analysis of Over
Three Million Coupons published in 1927, he collected 1,400,000 replies
from 907 different ads from various advertisers. This mind-bogglingly
extensive study produced results not unlike those of Strong, Hotchkiss,
and Adams. Look at the Starch data and you’ll see that a half-page
scores 68 percent better than a quarter-page and a full-page slightly
more than 300 percent better than the quarter.
Starch’s conclusion: Attention value lags behind increase of ad size. Starch
said, “Advertisements brought replies very nearly in proportion to their
size, although the smaller sizes had a slight advantage. This may have
been due to the possibility that the smaller advertisements...placed more
emphasis on securing responses.”
University of Michigan psychology professor Henry Adams didn’t
like anyone’s studies. He wanted to eliminate every possible variable that

172

Ad-Agency Secrets
didn’t directly concern size and attention. Magazines? Gone! Articles?
Removed! Pictures? Eliminated! Instead, Adams whipped out his scissors and pasted up colored squares in four different sizes: one inch,
one and a half, two, and three square inches. Talk about minimalism.
Using a tachistoscope—a short-exposure projection device used to help
train WWII fighter pilots to identify enemy aircraft—he exposed his
subjects to the material four squares at a time. Long story short: His
results were similar to all the others.
So how can we make sense of all this crazy research in a way that’s
practical for us as advertisers? It boils down to this: an ad’s attention
value is approximately proportionate to the square root of the area. Huh? Okay,
this means that if you want to double the attention your ad’s now getting, you need to enlarge it 400 percent. (So if it’s a quarter-page ad,
you need to run a full-pager.) To triple the attention, blow it up 900
percent (which is practical only if you’re starting out with a very small
ad such as a classified display). You’d otherwise have to go to a multipage ad, as described in Ad Agency Secret #32: Multi-Page Your Way to
Success.
So now you have a rule of thumb that tells you how to boost the
number of eyeballs that roll across your ads. Start with a proven-effective
ad and more attention = more reading = more convincing = more buying = more dollars in your pocket. Now that’s the kind of equation I
like!

Ad-Agency Secret #35: The Psychology of
Page and Section Positioning
Left page? Right page? Top? Middle? Bottom? Ask 100 different
advertisers and you’ll get 100 different reasons why your ad should
appear in a certain location within a publication. However, few, if any,
will have any research to back up their recommendations, but boy oh
boy, will they adamantly believe it!
Multiple studies of hundreds of issues of magazines and scores of
ads in dozens of industries have shown virtually no difference in the effectiveness of ads appearing on the inside pages toward the front, middle,
or back of any issue, or whether they appeared on left- or right-hand
pages. Researchers Starch, Stanton, Nixon, National Magazine, Lucas,
and others, generally concluded that what matters most is the ad itself:
the strength of its offer, and the execution of the copy and design.

173

CA$HVERTISING
A good ad will get noticed irrespective of its position
within the newspaper.*
—Roper Starch Worldwide
*But four of them get noticed more. See “Ad-Agency
Secret #36: The Fantastic Four.”

Ad-Agency Secret #36:
The Fantastic Four
Although there are no clear winners of the left-page vs. right-page
debate, as we just discussed, researchers at Starch INRA Hooper uncovered distinct ad-position advantages that are actually worth paying
more for. They compared 618 magazine ads occupying cover positions
to 10,789 single-page, four-color ads appearing on inside pages. They
checked both men’s and women’s publications, business and consumer,
and the findings were consistent. This “Fantastic Four” can help your
message stand out in even the most crowded publications. Here are the
results:
✸ Ads appearing on the inside front cover have the highest
average “Noted” (seen and recalled) scores with the
greatest increase—29 percent—over similar ads run
anywhere else in the same issue.
✸ Ads placed opposite a table of contents earn up to 25
percent higher scores.
✸ Ads appearing on the back cover score 22 percent higher
than ads inside.
✸ Ads placed on the inside back cover score a 6 percent
advantage over inside pages.
So stop fretting about where inside the publication your ad runs.
That’s likely not to make a shred of difference, unless, of course, you
choose to fork over more green stuff for the research-proven, higherattention cover slots.

174

Ad-Agency Secrets

Ad-Agency Secret #37:
Consumer Color Preferences
and How Color Affects Readership
Do you know what colors people like most? Dozens of experiments
have been made by various researchers in the United States and abroad
on the question of consumer color preferences. And as human psychology would have it, the results are pretty uniform across the board. Here,
in a nutshell, are the compiled rankings.
Ranking

Color

1

Blue

2

Red

3

Green

4

Violet

5

Orange

6

Yellow

The number-one preference for most people tested is blue, with red
a close second, then green, violet, orange, and yellow, ranked exactly in
that order. Look at your current sales materials—online and off—and
see if they reflect these worldwide findings.
Unfortunately, not all graphic designers are aware of this research
(they should be), so it’s up to you to specify the colors you’d like most
prominently featured.

Battles of the Oranges
Men and women differ only slightly in color preferences. Based on
21,000 reports, the order of preference was the same for both men and
women, except that men put orange in fifth place and yellow in sixth,
whereas women put yellow in fifth place and orange in sixth.

Color Preferences Change With Age
Infants select red as their first choice. Next come yellow, green, and
blue. At about 12 to 14 months this preference changes. Red remains in

175

CA$HVERTISING
first, yellow second, but blue leaps ahead of green. By the time children
are 5 years of age, red, green, and blue are about equal in preference,
but yellow is farther down the scale (less appealing). It’s during the
grade-school years that blue gradually overtakes yellow. This preference direction continues through adulthood. While blue goes up in
preference, yellow goes down, and continues to do so through as the
individual ages. Preference for red, however remains high.

The Older, the Bluer
Why is blue preferred as we grow older? The universal preference
for it may have some connection with what takes place inside the aging
human eye. Look inside an old man’s (or woman’s) eye, and you’ll see
that the optical lens has hazed, or yellowed. In fact, the lens of the
child’s eye may absorb only 10 percent of the blue light, whereas an
elderly eye may absorb 85 percent of blue light. One theory is that this is
nature’s way of protecting the eye against painfully bright light as we age.

Most-Loved Color Combos
How much money is spent on multi-color ads every year? Billions.
But are some color combinations actually preferred by more people than
others? Let’s take a look…
According to artists, the primary colors are red, yellow, and blue.
Many insist that the best color combinations are those that do not “cross
a primary.” Unlike artists, psychologists believe there are actually four
primary colors: red, green, yellow, and blue. They insist that the best
color combinations are those that employ complementary colors. Little
experimentation has been done, so the jury is still out, but the studies
that have been done do show similarities in results.
In one experiment by our ol’ researcher buddy Daniel Starch, 10
ads of two predominant colors each were ranked in preference. The
results showed that the most “complementary” color combinations
weren’t the most preferred.

176

Ad-Agency Secrets
Color Pairings

Complementary
Ranking

Consumer Preference
Ranking

Red–Green

1
(most complementary)

4

Blue–Yellow

2

1
(most preferred)

Violet–Green

3

5

Green–Yellow

4

9

Purple–Yellow

5

3

Purple–Orange

6

10

Red–Green

7

6

Blue–Orange

8

7

Red–Orange

9

8

Blue–Red

10
(least complementary)

2

Most Effective Paper and Ink Combos
Readership studies confirm that white and yellow are the two best
paper colors for easy reading. Use black, dark blue, and red inks for
maximum impact. The best combination? Black ink on yellow paper.
Worst? Red ink on green paper, an optically repulsive mix that’s practically unreadable—completely unreadable if you’re colorblind!

177

CA$HVERTISING

Colorful Research
Starch Research shows that color not only attracts readers, but also gets
them more involved. What’s more, color also encourages more in-depth
reading by:
✸ 60 percent over black-and-white only ads.
✸ 40 percent over two-color only ads.
In fact, color does more to affect whether your ad gets seen than
does size. So if it costs less to add color than it does to run a larger ad,
opt for color. In fact, research says that there’s a bigger difference in
readership between a black-and-white and a four-color ad than there is
between a one- and two-page color ad!
Black & white ads work best when emphasizing end
benefits, demonstrating dramatic situations and
appealing to the intellect.
—Starch Research

Ad-Agency Secret #38:
The Psychology of Pricing
What’s the difference between $19.98 and $20.00? No, I don’t mean
two cents. (I can figure that out myself.) I mean, psychologically, motivationally, persuasively?
It’s psychological pricing, and you see it used everywhere from department stores to restaurants to furniture retailers, even jewelers. WalMart is known for its heavy use of psychological pricing, with their
favorite end digits being “97.”
Odd-even pricing theory says that prices ending in odd amounts
such as 77, 95, and 99 suggest greater value than prices rounded up to
the next whole dollar. $9.77 seems like a better deal than $10.00. And
64 cents for a pound of bananas seems to be an okay price...but 70
cents? You gotta be kidding! But it’s more than the idea of saving a few
cents. For advertisers like you and me, the effects of such a seemingly
simple technique can be dramatic.
Prestige pricing, by contrast, says that if you want something to be
perceived as higher quality, you use only rounded whole numbers when
pricing. For example, $1,000.00 suggests higher quality than $999.95,

178

Ad-Agency Secrets
simply because we’ve been conditioned to interpret fractional pricing as
suggestive of value. Upscale retailer Nordstrom department store uses
prestige pricing, and so do many fine jewelers and other sellers of highend merchandise. Surf over to SaksFifthAvenue.com and you’ll see only
00s. In fact, the only cents you’ll see are in the prices of the few featured
sale items.
Fractional pricing is more widespread than you probably realize.
Researchers Holdershaw, Gendall, and Garland (1997) found that approximately 60 percent of advertised retail prices ended in 9, 30 percent ended in 5, 7 percent ended in 0, and the remaining seven digits,
combined, accounted for just more than 3 percent of the prices studied.
But why does this work? Psychologists say that (1) fractional pricing
suggests that the seller has calculated the lowest possible price, thus
the odd number, and (2) we ignore the last digits rather than mentally
rounding up. Doing so allows us to justify a purchase that may be teetering on
the threshold of affordability.
Schindler and Kibarian (1996) tested odd pricing using three versions of a direct-mail women’s clothing catalog. All three catalogs were
identical, except for the prices, which ended in 00, 88, and 99. The
winner? The 99 catalog produced 8 percent greater sales and more buyers than the 00 version. The 88 catalog pulled in as many sales and
buyers as the 00 version.
In 2000, Rutgers University did a study of people reading an ad for
a woman’s dress. The subjects reported that the dress priced at $49.99
was of lower quality than the same ad featuring the exact same dress
priced at an even $50.
Interestingly enough, people make some fascinating rationalizations
for fractional prices. For example, Schindler (1984) found that consumers who see a price ending in 98 or 99 are more likely to believe that
the price was not recently raised. (How anyone jumps to that conclusion I’ll never understand.)
According to Quigley and Notarantonio (1992), subjects who saw
an ad with a 98 or 99 ending price were much more likely to believe the
product was on sale than products with 00 end prices.
What about prices ending in 95? Are they as effective as 99? Research shows they’re not. Likewise, 49, 50, and 90 are also not suggestive of low price. But evidence shows that prices ending in 79, 88, and
98 do convey value.

179

CA$HVERTISING
Psychological pricing isn’t a random game of picking numbers out
of a hat, it’s a well-researched topic with great implications for your
bottom line. And now that you’ve read what consumers think and what
research recommends, how do your prices look now?

Ad-Agency Secret #39:
The Psychology of Color
Paint a prison’s walls pink, and there’s less inmate violence. Put a
baby in a yellow room, and the crying begins. Want to suppress your
appetite? Try the “Blue Wall Diet Plan.” Likewise, red classrooms hype
kids up, blue rooms chill them out. Volunteer fundraisers who wear
pink uniforms get bigger donations, and sage-green hospital corridors
ease patients’ frazzled nerves.
Color affects us strongly, including our perception of weight. For
example, lifting and carrying boxes all day long can be a real drag. So to
give its employees some relief, a manufacturer painted their heavy-looking
black boxes light green. Voila! Psychologically “lighter” boxes. To make
its packaging look heavier, a food manufacturer changed to a darkercolored package. Voila! “More” food inside.
Don’t confuse this phenomenon with fashion experts’ advice to wear
black for its “slimming” effect. Because of its ability to hide shadows
caused by “beer and brownie bulges,” black clothing helps smooth the
body’s contours. This in turn causes less attention to be paid to individual “problem areas” by presenting the body’s outline as a single optical unit without specific points of interest. That’s why bodybuilders
look beefier in white and light-colored shirts. All those shadows—
readily contrasted against the light-colored cloth—add depth to their
musculature.
This “darker is heavier” illusion is called apparent weight. And it’s
simply a matter of choosing the right color to give you the weight perception you’re looking for.
In an article in the American Journal of Psychology entitled “The Effect
of Color on Apparent Size and Weight,” psychologists Warden and Flynn
ran some tests. They put eight boxes—all the same size—in a glass
display case. They had people randomly look at each box, in varying
order, and asked them to rank the boxes according to how much they
thought they weighed. Here are the results, from lightest to heaviest:

180

Ad-Agency Secrets
Box Color

Scoring
(Higher=“Heavier”)

White

3.1

Yellow

3.5

Green

4.1

Blue

4.7

Purple

4.8

Gray

4.8

Red

4.9

Black

5.8

Color can even affect taste. Dr Pepper Snapple Group’s Barrelhead
Sugar-Free Root Beer was advertised as full-bodied, draught-style root
beer. When packaging experts Berni Corp. changed the background
color on the cans of their sugar-free beverage to beige from blue, people
reported that it tasted more like good-old-fashioned frosty-mug root
beer, even though the recipe never changed. Similarly, consumers say
that darker-colored orange drinks taste sweeter.
Colors—if strongly associated with other products—can also confuse. In the beverage industry, for example, Coca-Cola “owns” the color
red. When Berni Corp. designers changed Canada Dry’s sugar-free ginger ale can from red to green and white, sales shot up more than 25
percent. The red can had made consumers think “cola.”
Because of its power to not only draw attention, but also alter perception in ways that even the experts can’t explain, ad agencies are hypersensitive to how they use color in their ads and packaging. And now
that we know these facts, you and I should be too.
Results from a study of 21 languages revealed that
words for basic colors enter language almost universally in the following order:1. Black and white. 2. Red.
3. Green or yellow. 4. Yellow or green. 5. Blue.
6. Brown. 7. Gray, purple, pink, and orange.
—Berlin and Kay (1969)

181

CA$HVERTISING

Ad-Agency Secret #40:
Wrap Your Ads in White
It’s quick, easy, takes no time or skill, and research shows it works.
It’s the power of white-wrap isolation. It’s another one of those littleknown and little-used agency secrets revealed by decades-old testing
that can give your ad response a lift.
Buy more ad space—say a half-page instead of a quarter—but instead of filling it with more copy and pictures, put your original quarterpage ad smack in the center of it, wrapping your ad with white space.
Multiple experiments by researchers Poffenberger and Strong conclude
that, for example, a white-wrapped quarter-page ad will get more attention than a fully fleshed-out half-page ad loaded with text and graphics. Poffenberger’s tests showed the following improvements due to
white-wrapping:
The Attention Increase of White-Wrap Isolation
Standard Composition

White-Wrapped

Half-Page = 100%

Half-Page = 176%

Full-Page = 141%

N/A

Strong advises that the additional space purchased should not exceed 60 percent of the area of the advertisement itself. According to
Strong, “If more than 60 percent is used, the increased cost will not be
compensated by a corresponding increase in attention value. Furthermore, about 20 percent additional used as white space about the advertisement gives the greatest increase in effectiveness, cost considered.”

Ad-Agency Secret #41:
Give Yourself a “Cleverectomy”
It’s frustrating. Trying to create effective advertising for people who
don’t know the first thing about it—but think they do—is enough to
make you rip your hair out of your skull.
A Zen master once said that the best way to learn anything is to first
empty your head of preconceptions to make room for new knowledge.

182

Ad-Agency Secrets
For example, I invite you to listen in on a conversation I had with a
Web designer about a headline I wrote for him. It’s the most colorful
way I know to teach you this lesson.
Scott:
This headline stinks! “Powerful Web Pages Designed in 24
Hours by Famous Marketing Expert for $199” isn’t very
creative!
Drew: Agreed. Not at all.
Scott:
Well, can’t we do a little play on words, a pun, or give it a
twist?
Drew: Why give it a twist?
Scott:
To make it catchier. You know, so more people read it. Something like, “Only $250 Keeps You from Getting Caught in a
Sticky Web on the Net.”
Drew: [Suppressing a laugh] The purpose of your headline is not to
be “catchy,” Scott. It’s to be effective. Being creative for the
sake of being creative is a waste of time and money, and is a
complete misunderstanding of the principles of creating a
headline. Allowing yourself to be seduced by the thrill of creating a “clever” headline that will impress friends and family
(but not your prospects) is a terrible mistake! Besides, that
“Sticky Web” headline is ridiculous! It doesn’t tell the reader
what you’re selling! And because 60 percent of people who
read ads read only the headlines—they scan—you’ll lose at
least 60 percent of your audience. I teach these ideas in my
small-business audio seminar.
Scott:
I disagree. Major corporations create very catchy headlines
and win awards for them all the time. Did you ever see the
commercials during the Super Bowls? Very creative stuff.
Drew: [Sigh] You’re right. They do win awards. And the Super Bowl
commercials are very creative indeed. But “creative” does not
mean “effective.” If you can develop a headline that contains
all the elements of one that could be a potential winner, why
would you want to junk it up by trying to be clever?
Scott:
Why not make it clever first, and then make it effective—that
way you accomplish both things. The “Sticky Web” headline
can get people curious to read more.
Drew: But what happens to those who don’t get curious enough
and don’t read any further than that headline?

183

CA$HVERTISING
Scott:
Drew:

Scott:
Drew:

Scott:
Drew:

Scott:
Drew:

Scott:
Drew:

They weren’t prospects.
Not true! They may have very well been prospects, but because they had no clue what you’re selling, they didn’t bother
to read any further. You outright lost them!
Yeah, well...
Well nothing! Advertising is not supposed to be entertainment!
You may be entertained by it, but that’s not its purpose. It’s
not a creativity contest. It’s not meant to grace the walls of the
Louvre in Paris. It’s also not poetry, comedy, or a riddle to be
figured out. Advertising is not about winning awards for being tricky, off-the-wall, or ingenious. Advertising—plain and
simple—is about selling products and services. It’s business
communication with the goal to increase sales by interesting
people enough in a product or service that they ultimately
trade their money for it.
But that doesn’t mean it has to be boring!
Did I say anything about boring? It should always be interesting! But something doesn’t have to be clever or tricky to grab
and hold a prospect’s attention. You don’t write copy to appeal to the masses that aren’t buyers for your product as a way
to thank them for reading your ad! And those who are interested in the offer don’t need entertainment in order to buy.
They need benefits. Facts. An offer. And reassurance that you’ll
deliver what you promise.
I still feel that we can do something more than simply state
what we’re selling.
Read it again, Scott. This headline does much more than just
state what you’re selling. It has punch; it capitalizes on people’s
need for instant gratification by saying you’ll deliver in 24
hours; it capitalizes on your credibility as an expert by outright stating you are one; it appeals to those looking to save
money; it’s specific; it makes an offer; it’s clear; it doesn’t ask
the reader to figure out what it means; and it gets your point
across quickly. Who do you think it will appeal to?
[Silence]
It will appeal to those who need a Web page, want it done by a
pro, need it created quickly, and don’t want to spend a fortune. Your market!

184

Ad-Agency Secrets
Scott:
Drew:

Well, I guess we can try it.
Exactly. Try it. Advertising must be tested to be sure. And
because you like the “Sticky Web” concept so much, maybe
you want to sink a few thousand dollars on it and see if you
get any response from the few people who will read past the
headline.
Scott:
Very funny.
Drew: Was I laughing?
Bottom line: In advertising, it’s not clever to be clever.
Let’s say you have $1,000,000 tied up in your little
company and suddenly your advertising isn’t working
and sales are going down. And everything depends on
it. Your future depends on it, your family’s future depends on it, other people’s families depend on it. Now,
what do you want from me? Fine writing? Or do you
want to see the goddamned sales curve stop moving
down and start moving up?
—Rosser Reeves, CEO, Ted Bates Advertising Agency,
creator of the “Unique Selling Proposition”
(USP) concept

185

CHAPTER 4

Hot Lists: 101 Easy Ways to
Boost Your Ad Response
22 Response Superchargers
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

FORGET style—sell instead!
SCREAM “Free Information!”
WRITE short sentences and keep them reading.
USE short, simple words.
WRITE long copy.
BOIL it down; cut out the fluff!
STIR up desire by piling on the benefits.
SHOW what you’re selling—action shots are best.
GET personal! Say: you, you, you.
USE selling subheads to break up long copy.
PUT selling captions under your photos.
WRITE powerful visual adjectives to create mental movies.
SELL your product, not your competitor’s.
DON’T hold back, give them the full sell now!
ALWAYS include testimonials!
MAKE it ridiculously easy to act.
INCLUDE a response coupon to encourage action.
SET a deadline to break inertia.
OFFER a free gift for quick replies.

187

CA$HVERTISING
20. SAY the words Order Now!
21. OFFER free shipping.
22. BOOST response 50 percent or more with a “Bill Me” or
credit option.

9 Ways to Convey Value
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

SCREAM “Sale!”
GIVE them a coupon.
DIMINISH the price: “Less than a cup of coffee a day.”
EXPLAIN why the price is low: “Our boss ordered too
many!”
AMORTIZE it: “Just $1.25 a day.”
BOOST the value: Tell what it’s worth, not only what it
costs.
TELL how much others have paid (and we’re happy to
do so!).
CREATE a sense of scarcity with deadlines.
EMPLOY psychological pricing.

13 Ways to Make Buying Easy
GIVE your street, e-mail, and Web address.
GIVE your phone number.
PROVIDE street directions and parking advice.
SAY “It’s Easy to Order...”
ACCEPT phone orders.
ACCEPT mail orders.
ACCEPT online orders.
ACCEPT fax orders.
ACCEPT credit cards.
ACCEPT personal checks.
GET a toll-free phone number.
INCLUDE a long, strong guarantee—longer than your
competition’s.
13. OFFER installment payments for products more than
$15 (“3 easy payments of just $10.99”), shown to boost
response 15 percent.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

188

Hot Lists

11 Ways to Boost Coupon Returns
1. TELL them in the headline or subhead to return the
coupon.
2. SAY “Buy 1 Get 1 Free!” instead of “50% Off.”
3. USE a big “FREE!” at the top of your ad.
4. TELL what the coupon brings; say it again inside the
coupon itself.
5. SHOW what the coupon brings with a small photo or
illustration.
6. USE a bold coupon border.
7. SET a hard (firm date) or soft deadline (“The First 100
People...”).
8. PROVIDE check-off boxes to get people involved.
9. SAY “Valuable Coupon” at the top.
10. GIVE sufficient room for fill-ins.
11. POINT to the coupon with bold arrows.

46-Point “Killer Ad” Checklist
Here’s a fast and easy way to help ensure your ads contain the ingredients for success. Check all that apply to your ad; the more, the better.

Headline
[ ] Does it feature your product’s biggest benefit? (The #1
most important rule.)
[ ] Is it a real grabber? Does it elicit an emotional response ?
[ ] Does it use any of the 22 Psychologically Potent Headline
Starters shown in Chapter 3?
[ ] Is it significantly larger than your body copy? Boldfaced
too?
[ ] Is it powerful enough to get people to read your body
copy?
[ ] Does it make some kind of offer?
[ ] Is it authoritative, and not wimpy?
[ ] Is the headline set in initial caps? (This Is Initial Caps.)

189

CA$HVERTISING
Use ALL CAPS only if your headline is short—about four
to five words or so.
[ ] Is it in quotes? This can boost reading 25 percent.

Body Copy: First Sentence
[ ] Are you using one of the dozen body copy jump-starters
shown in Chapter 3?
[ ] Does it naturally flow from the headline?
[ ] Does it get right into the benefits for the reader, instead
of bragging about your company?
[ ] Does it almost force them to read the second sentence?
[ ] Is you one of the first few words?

Body Copy: General
[ ] Does it focus on how the reader will benefit?
[ ] Does it tell your readers why they should buy from you,
rather than from a competitor who offers the same
product/service?
[ ] If your product or service is exciting, does your ad sound
exciting?
[ ] Does it progress in a logical, methodical way?
1. Get attention.
2. Stimulate interest.
3. Build desire.
4. Offer proof.
5. Ask for action.
[ ] Are you trying to sell only one product at a time? (This is
best. However, some businesses, such as: delicatessens
and furniture stores, can get away with more. Those are
more similar to catalog ads: “Here’s everything we got.”)
[ ] Do you use selling subheads to break up long copy blocks
to make them easier on the eye?
[ ] Is the copy colorful, sprinkled with power visual
adjectives where appropriate?
[ ] Is it believable? (Not overblown or ridiculous.)

190

Hot Lists
[ ] Is it respectful of the reader and not insulting to his or
her intelligence?
[ ] Is it emotional? Does it create emotion (positive or
negative)?
[ ] Do you use the principle of extreme specificity?
[ ] Are your words, sentences, and paragraphs short? Simple
words?
[ ] Are your printed ads, sales letters, brochures, and such
set in a serif typeface, such as Schoolbook? Is your Web
copy set in a sans-serif typeface such as Arial or Verdana?
[ ] Do you tell your readers what you want them to do in a
super-simple way?
1. Clip this coupon.
2. Bring it to our store by August 21.
3. Save 50%.
[ ] Do you outright ask for the sale?
[ ] Did you set a deadline, if appropriate? (Most of the time
it is!)
[ ] If you have a lot of benefits to offer, do you list them in
bullet or numbered form?
[ ] Do you use testimonials? If you don’t have them, get
them!
[ ] Is your business name and phone number large and
instantly noticeable?
[ ] Did you include your logo? (Use it all the time—the more
often people see it, the more brand equity it builds.)
[ ] Do you give directions, maps, or landmarks? (They may
be more necessary than you think.)
[ ] Did you key your ad to better track responses?

Layout and Design
[ ] Did a professional designer produce your ad? (Not a
layout person!)
[ ] Is your headline big and bold?
[ ] Is the headline broken at the right words? For example:

191

CA$HVERTISING
WRONG

WAY:

Now You Can Throw
Away Your Glasses and
Enjoy 20/20 Vision Again!
RIGHT WAY:
Now You Can Throw Away
Your Glasses and Enjoy
20/20 Vision Again!
[ ] Is the ad easy to read? Is there a focus? (The eye should
naturally be pulled to certain areas first, not jump
around.)
[ ] Is there sufficient white space? Did you wrap it in white?
[ ] Did you indent your paragraphs? This makes reading
easier.
[ ] Is the number of separate elements kept to a minimum?
(Don’t have a million little tint blocks with type, three
bursts, two blocks of bullets, a corner flag, and four
reverse-type panels!)
[ ] Do you use art (photos or illustrations) relevant to your
sales message? (Please, no babies for steel-belted tire ads!)
[ ] Did you use a minimum number of typestyles? (One or
two; three max! Unless a professional designer
recommends it in a unique situation.)
[ ] Do you feature a picture of a person looking at you? (It’s
one of the most powerful ways to grab people’s
attention.)

192

Epilogue

Whether you realize it or not, you now know more about how to
create effective advertising than the majority of your competitors. Want
to prove this? Ask them about any of the ideas we’ve discussed. In response, you’ll likely get wrong answers and blank stares. That’s because
most of your competition is too busy running their businesses to stop
and learn how to make them more successful. I congratulate you for
doing so. In fact, the tips, tricks, techniques, and little-known principles I’ve shared with you in CA$HVERTISING are the same that a
marketing consultant or ad agency would use if you hired them for big
bucks. There’s no reason you can’t use them yourself and reap the rewards.
We don’t know a millionth of one percent
about anything.
—Thomas A. Edison
My 23 years in the ad business has taught me a lot, but it has only
been since WWII that consumer psychology has been recognized as its
own field of study. And even though advertising psychology experiments
were conducted decades prior—with most of the findings still valid
today—there’s still much more to learn. The study of the human mind
is as infinite as the mind itself.

193

CA$HVERTISING
Make no mistake: the marketplace will always be the final arbiter of
our work. Even our best efforts might crash and burn, despite following all the rules. But armed with the information in this book, you’ll
greatly increase your chances of success—that is, if you put it to use.
But don’t let your learning end with this book! Make a study of advertising. Read the classics featured in my recommended reading list. I
don’t care if you read only one page a day. Keep your motivation high by
feeding yourself the great lessons from the masters of advertising. Get
this information into your head so you can refine your approach and
increase the frequency of your successes. That’s how I did it, and you
can do the same, or better.
Remember: No matter what you sell or where you sell it, effective
advertising is the engine that can keep your business running in good
times and bad.
In the mid-first century AD, Roman philosopher Lucius Annaeus
Seneca said, “If wisdom were offered me with the provision that I should
keep it shut up and refrain from declaring it, I should refuse. There’s
no delight in owning anything unshared.”
I’m grateful for the appreciation you’ve expressed by reading this
book. It’s my sincerest hope that what I do benefits you in even the
smallest way. Doing so makes my effort worthwhile.
Although I may not know you personally—or perhaps we’ve met in
my CA$HVERTISING workshops or done business together—I want
the fact that we’ve become friends through the printed word to make a
difference for you. If I can assist you in any way, please feel free to
contact me at Drew@AdSurgeon.com. I’d also love to hear how the
ideas I’ve shared in this book have helped you.
Until then, I wish you health, happiness, and prosperity!
Drew Eric Whitman
September 2008

194

APPENDIX

Recommended Reading

There’s no need for you to read hundreds of books on advertising—
just the best. That’s why I’ve compiled a list for you, featuring many of the
classics. This list represents centuries of advertising experience by many of
the industry’s greats...and it’s all yours for just a few weeks of enjoyable
reading. Talk about a shortcut to success! You’ll find no fluff, because I’ve
selected books that contain only solid, put-it-to-immediate-use information. So, start by picking the ones that interest you most, and dig in.

On Copywriting, Advertising, and Marketing
My Life in Advertising and Scientific Advertising, by Claude Hopkins
McGraw-Hill (1966)
Here’s a classic by the man who started it all. Claude Hopkins is regarded
as one of the greatest copywriters of all time. He pioneered the “ReasonWhy” style of copywriting (telling people why to buy your product). It’s filled
with priceless stories, humor, and practical lessons you can apply to your ads
immediately. You can find this book free online; Google it!

Advertising Ideas, by John Caples
McGraw-Hill (1938)
This is a super collection of old magazine ads. Caples examines each ad
and points out what made it so successful. The ads are quite dated, but the

195

CA$HVERTISING
lessons are just as valuable today (basic human desires—the Life-Force 8—
do not change).

Tested Advertising Methods, by John Caples
Prentice Hall (1998)
Another excellent Caples book. A must-read.

Making Ads Pay, by John Caples
Dover Publications (1957)
Ditto.

Ogilvy on Advertising, by David Ogilvy
Vintage (1985)
What’s it like to climb inside the mind of one of advertising’s most
iconic legends? Reading this book is probably the closest thing to it. You’re
sure to come out with a dramatically changed view on how the industry
works, and doesn’t. I’ve quoted him often in this book because his no-bull
approach to advertising resonates strongly with everything I’ve been teaching for the past 23 years.

How to Write a Good Advertisement, by Victor O. Schwab
Wilshire Book Company (1985)
This neat little book is a super condensation of the key elements
necessary to put together an effective ad. It is easy to read, and is all
meat. You could read the entire book in under an hour.

Small-Space Advertising for Large and Small Advertising, by Printers Ink
Funk & Wagnalls (1948)
This great book was put together by the pioneer advertising magazine, Printers Ink. It contains a ton of information about writing and
designing small-space ads. Similar to the Caples books, it is dated; however, it’s important to realize that people have remained pretty much the
same throughout the years. It’s loaded with practical tips and suggestions.

Breakthrough Advertising, by Eugene M. Schwartz
Boardroom Classics (1984)
This is one of my all-time favorites by a wizard of direct response. It
discusses the psychology of advertising and the stages your product or
service goes through in consumers’ minds. It talks a great deal about

196

Appendix
headlines, examines how to fire up your copy, and contains some of the
hardest-hitting direct-response ads I’ve ever seen.

The Robert Collier Letter Book, by Robert Collier
Prentice Hall Trade (2000)
This is another big favorite of mine. Focusing on sales letter writing,
this fascinating book teaches you how to write copy that strikes at the
emotional heart of your prospects. It’s an absolute goldmine of great
examples, regarded as a classic in the advertising industry. Don’t miss it!

The 100 Greatest Advertisements, by Julian L. Watkins
Dover Publications (1959)
Just what the title says: one advertising masterpiece after another.
Can you spot what made them so great? A fun journey back in time,
and a super learning experience!

Words That Sell, by Richard Bayan
McGraw-Hill (2006), Revised and Expanded Edition
Bigger and better than the top-selling original version, it’s a virtual
advertising writer’s thesaurus by a great guy, a gifted (and hilarious) writer.
Packed with more than 6,000 high-powered words, phrases, and slogans.
Clever category cross-referencing helps jump-start your creative thinking. Whether you’re an advertising newbie or an old pro, it’s indispensible!

More Words That Sell, by Richard Bayan
McGraw-Hill (2003)
The popular follow-up title that’s packed with 3,500 high-powered,
idea-generating words, phrases, and slogans, conveniently arranged by
category and purpose. Example categories include: Power Words,
Sounds, Technology, and Youth Market. Helps you target your approach
for specific niches and fine-tune your copy for desired effects using
emotional, cerebral, action verbs, and more. A great way to kick-start
your copy no matter what you sell.

Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind, by Al Ries and Jack Trout
McGraw-Hill (2000)
An important book that tells you how to structure your business/
company in the market so you are perceived to be different and better.

197

CA$HVERTISING
Teaches you how to choose the best product name, how to strategize
using the competition’s weaknesses, and more.
The Copywriter’s Handbook, by Robert W. Bly
Holt Paperbacks (2006)
A classic guide that’s invaluable for anyone who writes or approves
copy. Bly shows how to write winning headlines and body copy for ads,
brochures, sales letters, magazines, newspapers, TV, radio, e-mails, and
multimedia presentations. It was even recommended by the legendary
David Ogilvy—high praise indeed.

On Creativity
Systematic Approach to Advertising Creativity, by Stephen Baker
McGraw-Hill (1979)
I couldn’t put this book down. Tons of examples, tons of tips, tons of fun!

A Whack on the Side of the Head, by Roger von Oech
Business Plus (1998)
If you’d like to be more creative, this (and the next book) is a good
start. Informal and filled with fun exercises and illustrations.

A Kick in the Seat of the Pants, by Roger von Oech
Harper Paperbacks (1986)
Ditto.

On Layout and Design
How to Design Effective Store Advertising, by M. L. Rosenblum
National Retail Merchants Association (1961)
This book takes the mystery out of ad design, and tells you the hows
and whys. (Might be difficult to locate.)

Looking Good in Print, by Roger C. Parker
Coriolis Group Books (1998)
Invaluable for anyone who wants to learn the basics of graphic design.
Jam-packed and super-easy to read and understand. Highly recommended.

198

Index

A
Abercrombie & Fitch, advertising
strategy for, 35
action
importance of, 151-152
message of, 46
ad-agency secrets, 79-185
additional beliefs, reinforcing, 53
adjectives, visual, 128
Age of Propaganda, 31
animation click-through
booster, 167-168
appeal, creating, 27
appeals, strongest advertising, 26
Art of Plain Talk, The, 81
aspirational groups, 41
associative groups, 41
attack
making a weak, 48
warning of an, 48
attention-getting power, 103-104

authority positioning, 144-147
authority, importance of, 59

B
Balance Theory, 36
bandwagon effect, 40-43
belief re-ranking, 50-53
beliefs,
changing the focus of, 51
changing the importance of, 52
reinforcing additional, 53
benefit, bottom-line, 45
benefits, bombarding the reader
with, 89-92
body copy,
first sentence of, 190
general, 190-191
bottom-line benefit, 45
buying, easy, 188-189

C
central route processing, 55
Cialdini, Robert, 57

199

CA$HVERTISING
claims, persuasive, 71
clarity, attaining critical, 64-65
click-through rates, 166
color combos, most popular, 176
color preferences, consumer, 175-178
color, psychology of, 180-181
commitment, importance of, 62-63
common desires, 20
comparison cues, 43
comparison, importance of, 58
consumer color
preferences, 175-178
consumer psychology, principles
of, 29-78
contemplation, 46
copy
long, 154-157
short, 154-157
core benefit, advertising, 44
coupon persuader, 163-166
coupon returns, boosting, 189
credibility, importance of, 27
critical clarity, attaining, 64-65
Cues of Influence, 57
Cues of Life model, 57

E
editorial ads, 162-163
ego morphing, 34-40
Elaboration Likelihood
Model, 54-57
evidence, importance of, 72-74
examples vs. statistics, 65-67
expression, verbal, 48

F
facts, selling the, 72-74
familiarity factor, 69
fear factor, selling with the, 29-30
fear, inducing, 31-32
fears, creating new, 32
Flesch Reading Ease Score, 81
Flesch, Rudolph, 81

G
Good Housekeeping Seal of
Approval, 39
grabbers, 152-154
group persuasion, 40
guillotine principle, 127

H
D
deadlines, 34
defense, encouraging a strong, 48
definite words, 85
demonstration, importance
of, 151-152
design and layout, 191-192
desires
common, 20
human, 21
direct mail, granny rule of, 118-126
disassociative groups, 41
dual-role persuasion, 67-69

Haldeman-Julius, 22
headline starters, 98-101
headline, how many words in a, 96
headlines, putting benefits in, 92-96
heuristics, 74-78
Hierarchy of Human Needs, 41
higher response, guaranteeing
a, 169-171
Holliser, advertising for, 35
human desires, 21
human inertia, battling, 137-139
human wants
nine learned, 23-27
secondary, 23-27

200

Index
I
ideas, being open to new, 13
identification, instant, 34-40
inertia, human, 137-139
influence, 15-18
6 weapons of, 57-63
Influence: Science and Practice, 43
initial caps, headlines with, 114
ink and paper combos, 177-178
Inoculation Theory, 47-49
instant identification, 34-40
internal representations, 134

multi-page ads, 168-169
newspaper ads, 20

N
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 47

O
offer testing, 158-159
Ogilvy layout principle, 110-111
one-day sales, 34
online reading, fonts for, 115-116
online response boosters, 166-168

P
J
Journal of Applied Psychology, 105

K
killer ad checklist, 189-192

L
layout and design, 191-192
layout principle, Ogilvy, 110-111
learned wants, human, 23-27
Life-Force 8, 21-22
liking, importance of, 58-59
limited offers, 34
Listerine, marketing strategy of, 33
long copy, 154-157

M
magazine ads, 20
maintenance, 46
Maslow, Abraham, 41
means-end chain, 44-45
mental movies, directing, 132-139
message organization, 64-65
message sideness, 67-69
morphing, ego, 34-40
motivate, tips to, 34
multi-ad formations, 169

page positioning, 173
paper and ink combos, 177-178
paragraph, short, 87-88
paragraphs, structuring, 84
PayPal, 11
peripheral route processing, 55
peripheral thinkers, 74
peripheral thinking, 39
personal pronouns, 88-89
Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 59
persuade, tips to, 34
persuader, coupon, 163
persuasion, 15-18
persuasive claims, 71
photos, seven best types of, 150
pictures, ads with, 149-152
positioning, authority, 144-147
precontemplation, 46
preparation, 46
pricing, psychology of, 178-180
pro-design difference, 116-117
products, representing, 35
pronouns, personal, 88-89
pseudo-movement, 151-152
psychology of ads, 17

201

CA$HVERTISING
psychology of simplicity, 80-89
Purell, marketing strategy of, 33

Q
Quaker Oats, marketing strategy
of, 39
questions, the power of, 117-118

R
readers, luring, 101-103
readership, 167
reality, changing customers’, 50-53
reciprocation, importance of, 60-61
redundancy, 69-70
repetition, 69-70
representations, internal, 134
response boosters, online, 166-168
response, boosting ad, 187-192
reverse-type pitfalls, 104-106
rhetorical questions, 70-72

S
sales letters, 147-149
sans serif fonts, 112
scarcity, 34
importance of, 63
increasing the, 97-98
secondary wants, human, 23-27
section positioning, 173
self-improvement, advertising, 22
sentences, short, 87
serif fonts, 112
sex, advertising, 22
short copy, 154-157
simplicity, psychology of, 80-89
6 weapons of influence, 57-63
size, psychology of, 171-173
social proof, psychology of, 126
solicitations, 124

specificity, extreme, 106-109
Starch Advertising Readership
Reports, 19
Starch, Daniel, 19
statistics vs. examples, 65-67
stress, causing, 30
superficial thinkers, 74
survey power, 159-161

T
testing, offer, 158-159
thinkers
peripheral, 74
superficial, 74
transfer strategy, importance
of, 38-40
transtheoretical model, 46-47
typefaces, psychology of, 111-116

U
unique selling proposition, 139-144

V
value, conveying, 188
verbal expression, 48
visual adjectives, powerful, 128

W
while supplies last offer, 34
white, wrapping ads in, 181
words
choice of, 25
definite, 85
simple, 86
writing advertising, 11

Y
Yellow Pages, advertising in the, 144

202

About the Author

Most people determine their career path in high school or college,
but Drew Eric Whitman—a.k.a. “Dr. Direct!™”—couldn’t wait to get
started. He began creating advertising at age 11 by writing and designing direct-response catalogs of jokes, gags, and novelties. Complete with
product illustrations, order forms, and postage charts, he distributed
them to his 5th grade classmates by the armful and collected cash orders in equal abundance. Although his teachers did not encourage
Drew’s entrepreneurial spirit (they would have preferred that he had
done his homework rather than sold whoopee cushions), it marked the
beginning of an exciting career in the wacky and wonderful world of
creative writing and advertising.
Many years later, after extensive experience in face-to-face selling of
everything from printing to clothing and jewelry to real estate, a degree
in advertising from Temple University started the ball rolling. Today,
Drew is an outspoken, humorous, and philosophical advertising trainer
and writer. He worked for the direct-response division of the largest adagency in Philadelphia. He was also senior direct response copywriter
for one of the largest direct-to-the-consumer insurance companies in
the world. He created powerfully effective advertising for companies
ranging from small retail shops to giant, multi-million dollar corporations. His work has been used by many of the largest and most successful companies and organizations in the United States including
American Automobile Association, Advertising Specialty Institute,

203

CA$HVERTISING
American Legion, Amoco, Faber-Castell, Texaco, Day-Timers, and many
others.
Drew is co-author of The $50,000 Business Makeover Marathon and
developer/producer of the nationally acclaimed CA$HVERTISING crashcourse advertising seminar.
As a resident of sunny southern California, Drew’s creative mind is
free from the constricting bounds of his former metropolitan life in
Philadelphia. When he’s not writing, Drew is thinking about what he
should be writing, or trying to find the best enchiladas and salsa in
Southern California with his wonderful wife, Lindsay, and flat-coated
retriever, Joey, the sweetest four-pawed beast on planet Earth.

204

About the Author
What Organizations and Participants Are Saying About
Drew Eric Whitman’s CA$HVERTISING Seminar
Excellent! Tremendous! One of the finest seminars I have ever attended.
—John P. Cataldo, Sr., executive director,
Greater Warminster Area (Pa.) Chamber of Commerce
What a difference your presentation was. It was worth the attendance fee just to
see your performance!
—Steve Galyean, executive director,
Galax-Carroll-Grayson (Va.) Chamber of Commerce
After your presentation, I can end my search for the perfect seminar.
—Linda Harvey, executive director,
Butler County (Pa.) Chamber of Commerce
I am beginning to hear from others who did not attend and are asking when we
might do a “repeat” since they are being told they missed the seminar of the year!
—Russ Merritt, executive director,
Rocky Mount (VA) Chamber of Commerce
Outstanding presentation. Your humorous, fast-paced style was simply a great bonus.
—Dee Sturgill, Supervisor, Business and Marketing Education,
State of Ohio Department of Education
The information was relevant and the presentation style was excellent. In fact,
it had more information than some eight-hour seminars we’ve had.
—Diane Schwenke, president,
Grand Junction (Colo.) Chamber of Commerce
Thank you, thank you thank you! Your presentation was very entertaining, as
well as informative, and I have heard nothing but positive comments from those
in attendance.
—Kimberly A. Belinsky, program manager,
Bloomsburg Area (Pa.) Chamber of Commerce
To say he’s enthusiastic, high energy, and knowledgeable on the subject of advertising would be putting it mildly. Drew not only met our expectations, but exceeded them.
—Lee R. Luff, CCE, president,
Findlay-Hancock (Ohio) Chamber of Commerce

205

CA$HVERTISING
Without a doubt, you were the best keynote speaker we have had at our annual
conference.
—Barbara Cunningham, Business and Industry Specialist,
University Extension SBDC, Kansas, City, Mo.
Once you have an audience captive, they are never distracted for one second.
Two hours seemed like 10 minutes.
—Carole Woodward, President,
Lexington Area (N.C.) Chamber of Commerce

When Asked,
“What Did You Like Most About the Seminar?”
Participants Said:
I gained a tremendous amount of knowledge. Very useful...very powerful!
—Janell M. Bauer, The Resource Center, Inc.
Everything said was a good idea.
—Andy Raggio, Park Western Leasing
The enthusiasm!
—Kathy Sanders, Mesa Moving & Storage
Drew’s enthusiasm and presentation of ideas and facts.
—Kay Albright, Illusions of The Heart
All of it was incredibly helpful and insightful. Amazingly, you covered it all.
Your personality and delivery made it fun!
—Debra Hesse, Colorado Easter Seal
Sheer volume of immediately usable information.
—Gina McCullough, Butler Memorial Hospital
Interesting, stimulating speaker. Much valuable information given. I started
playing with ad copy almost immediately and had fun with it.
—Donna Armistead, Superior School of Dance
Fast-paced—applicable to what I do.
—Kay Weddle, The Framer’s Daughter

206

About the Author
Right to the point.
—Chet Grochoski, Calumet Machine
Very entertaining. I liked the fast pace and enthusiasm of the speaker. My mind
never wandered...stayed right with him. Very lively!
—Melanie B. Ingram, First National Bank of Ferrum
Lots of information in a short amount of time.
—T. Wayne Cundiff, Cundiff Lumber, Inc.
Well presented. Most informative.
—Linda Burger, Collins-McKee Funeral Services
Direct—to the point—holds your attention.
—Charles D. Easter, Martin Jewelry
Great presentation! Love the energy!
—Mary Etta Clemons, Wythe-Grayson Regional Library
Interesting start to stop.
—David B. Imhof, Imhof Supply, Inc.
Specific information. Novel approach. Lots of information.
—Nancy Monday-Yates, The Unicorn
Excellent speaker, not boring.
—Deborah Sizer, WBOB Radio
My mind did not wander as it usually does during seminars!
—Jan Lubinski, Best Western Kings Inn & Franklin Square Inn
Lively presentation. Obviously knowledgeable.
—Jerry D. Johnson, North Pittsburgh Telephone Co.
Advertising is simple if you know what I learned today.
—Karla Korpela, Evert’s Motor Sales, Inc.

207

